*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE MOMENT OF
HAPPINESS ***




                     THE LITTLE MOMENT OF HAPPINESS

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: Kendall regarded her. She was a little thing with clear
eyes and a rather pretty face.]

------------------------------------------------------------------------


                     THE LITTLE MOMENT OF HAPPINESS

                                   By
                       CLARENCE BUDINGTON KELLAND

                               Author of
         “_The Source_,” “_The Hidden Spring_,” “_Sudden Jim_,”
                       “_The Highflyers_,” _etc._

                              FRONTISPIECE

                           A. L. BURT COMPANY
                       Publishers        New York
            Published by arrangement with Harper & Brothers

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                     THE LITTLE MOMENT OF HAPPINESS




                               CHAPTER I


Those low-lying hills were France!

They had not lifted into view suddenly, but had rather emerged from the
east, solidifying slowly out of a slate-colored blur which to the eyes
of unaccustomed voyagers might or might not have been land. There was no
ebullition of spirits. The two thousand men and women aboard the vessel
crowded to the rail and strained their eyes toward that land in which
great events awaited them, for the most part in utter silence.
Conversation failed. There was an impressiveness about the moment akin
to the impressiveness of entering some great cathedral—there was awe!...
There, rising out of the east was France!... _France_!

The sentiment that stirred them was more profound than a thrill. The day
had held its thrill for them—a thrill that for many of them had followed
a sleepless night. Those who had slept had done so fully clothed, with
life-jackets within instant touch of the hand. For the kindly ocean had
been made dangerous, not by the elements, which throughout the voyage
had held themselves in restraint, but by men. It had been a morning of
mists which lay upon the placid waters and glowed in response to the
touch of the rising sun. Then, as the luminous grayness dissipated,
there came into view far off to the northward, a spot which grew and
approached until it became a grim and business-like French destroyer to
be greeted with cheers of relief. It was the convoy. There was a thrill.
It spelled safety—that little boat with ready guns—but it spoke of
danger as well. The early passengers who watched the approach of the
little vessel of war warmed with affection toward it. It was their
guardian, come out of nothingness to protect them through the remaining
perilous miles of ocean.

In the cabin a little party of women had remained through the night,
fearful of the unseen, impressed by the perils which might hide beneath
the dark waters which the bow of the vessel turned up into wonderful
patterns of phosphorescence. They had grouped together to draw what
comfort they could from companionship. Now they emerged on deck
relieved, almost jubilant, until one of their number said, suddenly, “I
am told it is the last ten miles which is most dangerous.”

The destroyer ran alongside, and a sailor with two little flags waved a
long message to the bridge; then she dropped back astern, and with her
passed that thrill which had stirred the ship’s company.

No, it was no thrill that moved the passengers on the vessel as the
hills of France arose before them; the emotion was more profound, more
impressive. To many of them it was the first sight of a foreign shore,
but, more than that, it was their first sight of France—of that France
which by the greatness of her spirit during three years of peril, of
suffering, of horrors, had become not a country, but a _symbol_.

For the most part the passengers were in uniform. In these days there
were no tourists, none who traveled abroad for amusement or recreation
or to accomplish that object so dear to Americans—to improve the mind.
These voyagers went as servants, to take their part, great or small, in
that war which America had come to see at last was _her_ war.

There were many young officers among the first-class passengers, boyish
lieutenants proud of unaccustomed uniforms, a little set up because they
were not as other men; but all eager to be at their grim work. In a
month their swanking would be a thing of the past, for they would have
encountered reality, and out of the reality they would emerge as men.
There was a captain or so, themselves boyish; there were Red Cross men
who, before assuming their uniforms, had been lawyers, merchants,
brokers. Older men there were, wearing well-tailored uniforms and
carrying themselves with assurance. There was a considerable company of
Y. M. C. A. workers, on their way to do what came to hand. They were not
certain yet what it was to be, but they would learn. Their uniforms were
not so well tailored, their puttees were not of expensive leather like
those of the officers and Red Cross men. As one reviewed them he saw
that all but a few were not members of the _executive_ class, but
workers. They were coming to drive trucks, to sell meager supplies over
the makeshift counters of huts and canteens, to serve the soldier in
such ways as offered.

And there were women—Red Cross women, Y. M. C. A. women, a few musicians
and entertainers come to lighten the tedium of the boys in khaki. There
were a few civilians, French people, returning from America for purposes
important only to them. And there was a sprinkling of French officers,
among them a boyish hero much followed by women’s eyes because he was a
handsome boy made more handsome by the splendor of his uniform—trousers
of red, long coat of black, and most of all, perhaps, by the cluster of
medals upon his breast. He was only a youth, but he was France’s most
famous aviator.

There were third-class passengers. Forward were six hundred Poles in
vivid red coats, recruited in the United States and Canada for the
Polish Legion, going to fight for their country, which could only be a
member of the family of nations if the Allies succeeded in crushing the
enemy. Aft there were six hundred American boys—machine-gun men and a
signal-corps unit.

All of them—officers, men, women—knew that those hills concealed
something, something tremendous. Resident in each individual was a
consciousness that beyond there lay a new world, but how new and how
different none was capable of realizing. The old life, the old ways, the
accustomed rules of the game of life, had been left behind and few had
the vision to perceive that they were left behind forever, that nothing
could again be as it had been, and that they were standing poised for a
step through a doorway which led into a new era.

They were about to find contact with another civilization, with another
philosophy, another method of life. It was not alone that they were to
be set down in an alien land, amid a people speaking a tongue which was
meaningless to them, and living their lives according to a manner which
seemed good to them—and which _was_ good to them and to all who saw it
with clear eyes and open mind—but because they were about to become a
part of events through which no soul can pass without being so modified
and molded as to emerge a different soul, detached, unrelated, cut off
by experience and knowledge from the soul that had been.

Behind those low-lying hills lay France.... What was France? It was, for
every man and woman aboard that vessel, the great adventure of the soul.
Just that. Each one of them was to be born again. With the touch of the
soil of France beneath their feet would come a new birth, the entrance
into a new life in which each would find much to wonder at, much to
admire, much to puzzle over.... But they would find _themselves_.
Moreover they would find a world which had resolved itself into
genuineness, a world which was true, because war had stripped it of
pretense.

The American soul is a peculiar affair. It is circumscribed by
environment, by inherited prejudices. It is, for the most part,
incapable of comprehending itself, much less the soul of another people
of another temperament and genius, ripened by plenitude of years and by
a hundred generations of genius which has studied the art of living. The
American soul is a living thing imprisoned in a cage of concealments. It
was to come into intimate contact with a people who do not believe in
imprisoning the soul, who have sought for and discovered the essentials,
and have cut away—perhaps have never found the necessity for cutting
away—the shame, the self-deceptions, the glossings-over, the
self-imposed blind spots, which make us what we are. The American soul
recognizes food and admits it to thought’s decent society, but it
declines to recognize the existence of processes of digestion. The
French soul knows that food must be digested as well as eaten. To the
French soul digestion is respectable.

So the American soul was to meet the French soul—a meeting of the poles.
From such a meeting must result something worth while to the world....

From that day, the 18th of May, A.D. 1918, those men and women would
calculate the events of their lives. It was the beginning of a new
dispensation. As the world dates events as A.D. or B.C., so these
Americans would date their events as, “Before I landed in France,” or,
“After I landed in France.”

It was from the port side of the vessel that the best view of the now
distinct land was to be obtained, and the rail was crowded from end to
end of the long deck with men and women who looked and looked as if land
were a new and tremendous curiosity, a something which they had never
seen before and might miss altogether if their attention wavered for an
instant. Tea and wafers had just been served by the deck stewards. Well
forward stood a young man with the bars of a captain on his shoulders;
he stood back from the rail, alone, looking over the heads of the other
passengers, as his height made it practicable for him to do. He held in
his right hand a cup of tea and was eating one of a handful of square
wafers. Not as a man eats who is dallying with the quaint foreign custom
of afternoon tea did he bear himself, but as a young man who is honestly
hungry. He addressed himself to those biscuits and washed them down with
tea because it had been long hours since the midday meal and because his
big young body was demanding food.

In his uniform he presented a figure to admire, as did most of the young
officers aboard. His back was broad, his legs straight, and, though not
bulky, gave one the impression that he was graciously and strongly made.
One may read much from a man’s legs. More especially is this so in
uniform and leather puttees. Indications of character are resident in a
calf, but more especially in knees and ankles. These things are
concealed by the trousers of civilian life. Some day an astute judge of
character will write a monograph on masculine legs and revolutionize the
appraisal of men. The captain’s legs were a credit to the United States,
the army, and himself.

He was not handsome, nor was his face delicate with overmuch
intellectual labor. If you had met him in a crowd you would have said
immediately that here was a young man who could play a bully game of
football. That was the impression his features gave—of ability to play a
rough game splendidly. It was not the face of a pugilist nor of a
society man. It was the face of an average young American of the class
which goes to college, acquires enough education to make him easy in the
presence of gentlemen, and upon which to base a greater success in life
than had been possible to his father who came before him. When you
looked at him you thought in physical terms before you considered his
possible mentality. There was nothing dull about him; there were
indications of a reasonable amount of good nature, and some intolerance,
and much of boyishness. His attention was equally divided between France
and biscuits.

A young woman just in front of him turned and looked up at him. “Here
comes something,” she said, pointing.

“Dirigible,” he replied, following the direction of her finger.

The dirigible buzzed out to the vessel, looked it over, and evidently
with satisfied mind turned and hurried away toward shore again....

“There’s a convoy or something,” said the young woman.

The captain was interested. “Probably coastwise ships coming down from
England. Six of them, aren’t there?... And see all those other little
boats in there. Must be close to the harbor.”

“We’re slowing down.... See, there’s that little boat like a tug with a
cannon up in front. It’s signaling us.”

“Pilot, probably.”

The vessel lost headway and everybody watched the pilot come aboard as
if it were some strange phenomenon—as it was to all but a few.

“I wonder if we’ll be allowed to cable home that we have arrived?...
What do you think, Captain Ware?”

“Haven’t the least idea in the world. Don’t see why not, though, Miss
Knox.... War Department ’tends to it for us.”

“My people will be terribly worried until they hear I am safe, and then
they’ll keep on being worried until I’m back in New York again.... I’m
going to sit down. Come on.”

Maude Knox’s tone approached the proprietary, not that she had asserted
any permanent claim to Captain Ware, but only those property rights _in
transitu_ which arise even in war-time aboard a transatlantic liner. She
had promenaded with him, had played bridge with him, and had sat out on
deck—the lightless decks—with him as other young men and women aboard
ship had embarked on friendly alliances for the voyage. These two had
talked, or rather Miss Knox had talked and Captain Ware had listened,
and rather liked each other—that was all. There had been nothing
sentimental in their relations, even under the moon and in the not
unromantic precautionary darkness enforced by the peril of the
submarine. They were recognized by the passengers as having paired off,
just as a dozen other young couples were similarly indulgently
recognized. It was youth making the best of its every moment. That was
all.

“I simply can’t imagine what it is going to be like—living over here,”
she said. “It must have been terribly interesting for an American to
live in France before the war—but now, with all the effects of war to
see, it will be like living in a thrilling book, don’t you think?”

Ware had thought of France mostly in terms of war, of ruined villages,
lines of trenches, strategic positions. The romance of going to war in
France had not missed him; he felt it, but he felt it with a vagueness,
an ignorance of what he was to find, and a chaotic conception of the
French people that, perhaps, but made the adventure the more romantic to
him. He was aware that something great, something that was going to
interest him as he had never been interested before, was about to happen
to him. But what it would be like he could not picture, did not try to
picture. He knew he wanted to see Paris, because he had heard tales of
Paris. Most of them he was inclined to discount, but enough remained to
make him feel that the city was well worth his investigation. That is as
far as he had thought of civilian France.... What his thoughts and
sensations were, now that he was nearing those shores, he was unable to
put into words, and if he had been able the natural reticence of the
young man afraid of appearing sentimental would have caused him to
remain silent. Not so Maude Knox.

Maude was the daughter of a professor of philosophy in a Mid-Western
university. From her babyhood she was accustomed to the dissection of
souls. She had seen her own soul on her father’s mental operating-table,
and, somehow, the reserves which are inherent in the common run of girls
seemed to be what she called _piffle_. She had grown up with her father
and a housekeeper, and theories and philosophies and iconoclasms had
been the commonplace staple of her mental diet. A great many of them,
too, she catalogued in her small head as piffle. On the whole, she was a
bit _queer_, or so her girl friends said, but by no means unwomanly or
otherwise than girlish. She had a way of liking to look facts in the
face, and of discussing them critically. That made her queer. She liked
to talk about things, and inquire into things, and was fairly capable of
analysis. She fancied she knew a great deal about life and the
complexities of human conduct—because she had heard them discussed and
had discussed them herself. Actually she was an exceedingly unworldly
young person, with more than the usual amount of tolerance for the
peculiarities of other folks.... She was rather small, with hair that
crinkled close to her head and which no amount of breeze seemed ever to
disarrange; her eyes, when she laughed, closed to twinkling slits, and
tiny wrinkles ran out from their corners in a droll sort of way; her
cheek-bones were high, and her cheeks not at all rounded. She was
pretty, but she was also undoubtedly _chic_ and agreeable-looking....
She wore a leather coat, and when she walked she thrust her hands into
the side pockets and strode with a swing of the shoulders from side to
side that was almost a boyish swagger. One might have been excused for
concluding that she had only recently emerged from tomboyhood. She had a
certain confidence of bearing that was at once attractive and a
safeguard. There was something about her which seemed to say to young
men who looked at her with interest, “No nonsense here.”

There are girls who are advertised by their appearance as amenable to
shaded porches, moonlit nights, and sentimental interludes. Maude Knox
was not one of these. Yet she did not impress one as being exempt from
emotions and sensations; she gave no warning that one must expect no
warmth. It was rather that emotions, sensations, warmth were there, but
surely controlled, not to be manifested lightly or frivolously. Somehow
it was easier to think of her as a wife than as a sweetheart....

Ware was thinking how his father would enjoy all this, the arrival in a
strange land, the sights, the anticipation of events to come. His mother
would not have enjoyed it. There was too much bustle and confusion for
her, too much to upset the nerves. In all likelihood she would be
confined to her cabin with one of those nervous headaches.... But his
father—his father was one of those men who never grow beyond their
enthusiasms nor beyond naïve manifestations of their enthusiasms.

“Yes,” he said, in answer to Miss Knox, “the folks will worry, of
course.... Dad won’t worry so much, but mother’ll be in a stew. She’s
usually in a stew.”

“I had a _time_ to get father to let me come. He said a war was no place
for a young lady.... But this seems to be a different kind of a war,
doesn’t it. Women are going to it.”

“I can understand nurses....” he said, hesitatingly.

“But not the rest of us. That’s because you’re old-fashioned and
Middle-Western.... The army wouldn’t let us come if we weren’t useful.”

“What, exactly, are you going to do?”

“Why, ... _something_—something _useful_.”

“There’s that girl that plays the harp, and a choir-singer, and a couple
of actresses. I can understand them more or less, but you ... I really
don’t. You’re not a stenographer, nor anything like that, nor an
entertainer, nor a nurse, nor an ambulance-driver.”

“Maybe I’ll be a chaperon,” she said, taking refuge in lightness, for
she really did not know what she _was_ going to do. She was classified
as a canteen worker. Her uniform was that of the Y. M. C. A., and she
had remarked with feeling that the hat was already beginning to fade....

“I presume you know as much about it as any of us do.... I wish you
could hear dad on the war and on Germany. He reads the papers to the
last punctuation mark, but, somehow, he never seems to grasp it.
Possibly most folks are that way, but father always says what he thinks,
and goes ahead pronouncing the names of French towns, and has opinions
about everything. He gets excited and pounds on the table.... Dad’s all
right. We’ve always done things together since I was a kid. He’s that
kind.”

She was able to see that a very real affection for his father was stated
in those phrases. She wondered about the father—if he resembled his son
in appearance or character.... He did not. The father was a middle-sized
man of no education except what an undirected reading of many books had
given him. He was a great reader of novels, especially of historical
romances, and his knowledge of the past of the nations came from these.

His idea of France was Athos, Porthos Aramis, and d’Artagnan, with
Miladi and a few cardinals and intriguing duchesses thrown in.... He
owned a grocery in Detroit which did moderately well. His soul was
filled with admiration and love for his son. He had a temper given to
sudden, brief flashes ... and he had no bad habits except that he chewed
tobacco surreptitiously. People liked him, especially children. He was
good personally, but had no vindictive attitude toward evil. Every
Sunday he went to church without complaint and without thought of it;
though he would have enjoyed himself much more in a boat with a
fish-line. When Captain Ware was younger and got into difficulties which
his mother magnified into crimes and wept and foresaw disgrace, Mr. Ware
would say, “Now don’t you worry, mother; that boy’s coming out all
right....”

“Mother’s more worried about my coming to wicked France than about my
being shot up,” he said, presently, and smiled.

His mother was the dominant member of the family. She was the last word
in orthodoxy and was stubbornly dogmatic. She was religious after the
manner of a zealot, but in her life economy took place just before
religion. One had to save money and be economical to enter the kingdom
of heaven; she could even overlook a few moral lapses in an individual
who was frugal and laid by systematically for a rainy day.... All his
life Captain Ware had been afraid of pulling down on his head what he
privately called his mother’s “tantrums.” These were hysterical
outbursts following some escapade of his, or possibly following a mere
argument in which economy or religion was mentioned. She could cast
stinging darts with her tongue, and when she was opposed, it did not
much matter where, she was reckless in dispensing them. Anybody who
stood near was likely to be wounded.

But she loved her son savagely and jealously, and lived her life and
practised her economies for him. Anything which appertained to the
perpetuation of the species was somehow abhorrent to her. Here, as
everywhere, she was an extremist. Before her son was ten years old she
was already in a state of mind, and embarrassed him so that he exerted
himself to avoid being alone with her, by questioning him and by very
frank warnings.... At ten she gave him a book to read entitled _Plain
Facts_. She worked as she thought, frantically, without sparing herself
or anybody else ... and the result was that she was burning herself
out.... She was a remarkable woman, sometimes a lovable and
companionable woman, but so intense, so intolerant of any belief which
did not agree perfectly with hers, that people always felt the necessity
of being on their guard with her so as not to “set her off.”

It was from these parents that Captain Ware inherited, and he was like
neither of them.... But traces of both were easy to find in him. When
one looks for explanations of his acts, one would do well to study his
parents and to see if his acts did not spring from inherited
characteristics and tendencies, or were not the result of a revulsion
against parental characteristics which had irked him as a boy.

Now, for the first time in his life—and he was twenty-six years old—he
was cutting loose from family contacts, and cutting loose in this total
and revolutionary manner. His first adventure in freedom was into a new
world which would not understand him and which he was not equipped to
understand himself.... He had always lived at home, except for his four
years in college, and his mother’s figure had been always present, for
she had made it her business to keep it ever present.... In a few hours
he would set his foot on the soil of France.... With one sudden wrench,
war had snatched him from an environment dominated by his mother—and set
him down in France.

“I wonder if we’ll get ashore to-night,” said Miss Knox.

That question presently answered itself. After a short progress up the
river, the vessel dropped her anchor, there to remain until morning....
That night Captain Ware sat late on deck with Maude Knox, watching the
strange river thick with anchored craft which busied themselves by
sending flashing signals to each other—mysterious signals that seemed to
say: “You have arrived at the war. We are busy about the war....”

The Polish volunteers forward sang the weird songs of their land; the
Americans aft manifested their relief at a safe arrival by wildly
cheered boxing-bouts followed by enthusiastic, if somewhat ragged,
singing of many popular songs.... There was a preference for that
sentimental type of song which had to do with weeping sweethearts left
standing on the pier, and with mothers dedicating their boys to death
for the flag....

In the morning came the distress of customs examination and the woes of
finding and identifying baggage. Ware assisted Miss Knox as other young
officers were assisting their partners of the voyage.... The vessel tied
up to the dock. Miss Knox shook hands and said good-by, marching down
the steep incline of the gangplank with the members of her party.

“I wonder if I’ll ever see him again?” she thought.

As for Captain Ware, the girl passed completely from his mind. He had
other things to think about and a great curiosity to satisfy.... So far
as he was concerned, she had passed out of his life.

He stood at the rail, looking down upon the wharf. Below him an American
soldier thrust his head out of a port-hole, looked about him sternly,
and then demanded of a Frenchman below, “Say, mister, where’s all this
trouble, anyhow?”

His attitude was typical of those boys. There was trouble some place and
they wanted to get to it and settle it with promptness. It was the
attitude of a policeman a little late at the scene of a fight....

Kendall Ware arrived in Paris early on the evening of May 19th and
alighted from the crowded train in the Gare d’Orléans. He was excited.
It was impossible that he should actually be in Paris, but he was
unmistakably there. It rather astounded him and he wanted to rush out of
the gray old station to see it at once.... To arrive in Paris was a
fitting climax for such a day as he was completing, a day that had given
him his first glimpses of beautiful France, glimpses from a rapidly
moving train that had caused him to say to himself, “It’s no wonder the
French will fight for such a country.” Already he was impressed by
France; already admiration for it was beginning to grow within him....
That beautiful, smiling, rich, clean expanse of hills and fields and
vineyards, punctuated by little red-tiled villages and by ancient
sprawling stone farm buildings, had touched the sentimental in him. He
thought he understood why Frenchmen love their land ... but he had not
scratched the outer husk of that reason yet. It would require weeks for
him to discover that it was not the material, not land nor soil nor the
structures reared by men, that caused the Frenchman’s passionate love;
it was, he would discover, the imponderables, the immaterial—it was the
soul that resided in the material....

He climbed the stairs from the train-shed into the station proper, and
paused a moment to regard with boyish interest the crowd composed of
women and soldiers, of _poilus_ carrying full equipment—sturdy little
men whose age seemed greater than it was by reason of four years given
to such affairs as Verdun, the Marne, the battles in the Champagne.
These men had been in it. They had heard cannon roar with deadly intent;
they had taken part in charges and in retreats; the trench and the
dugout were more their homes to-day, through years of custom, than their
own farms or cottages.... They were _soldiers_, and they looked to be
soldiers.

There were uniforms of other nationalities, too: of the British, the
brown and tasseled caps of the Belgians, the gray and peaked caps of the
Italians—and the khaki of Americans. There was a boy with an arm-band
bearing the letters M P, with which he was to become very familiar—the
everywhere present and remarkably efficient military police of the
American Army....

Presently he was in the dark street. The darkness came as a surprise to
him until he recalled that Paris nights slept under the constant threat
of German _Gothas_. The street lights—casting a dim-blue glow—were
shaded above so that no light might rise to tell hostile raiders that a
great city lay here.... Strain his eyes as he would, he could not see
Paris, only a vague hint of buildings that might be palaces or
warehouses, for all that he could see.... He looked for a taxicab.

Then it occurred to him that when he found a conveyance he had scant
language with which to direct the chauffeur. He was going to the
University Union, once the Palais Royal Hôtel, now taken over by
American universities and colleges as both club and hotel for American
university men in the army.... A tiny taxicab rattled up to the curb—all
Paris taxicabs rattle in this way—and he approached it with some
embarrassment.

“University Union,” he said to the chauffeur.

“_Comment?_”

“U-ni-versity Union,” said Kendall, speaking very slowly and distinctly.

“_Comment?_” repeated the chauffeur, waggling his head.

Out of the crowd stepped a Frenchman, smiling. “What is it monsieur
desires? May I be of assistance to monsieur?”

“I want to go to the University Union, and I don’t know how to tell this
man.”

“The University Union? I do not know it. Is it that it is an hotel,
monsieur? Do you know its location?”

Kendall searched for a note-book and read the address. “Number eight rue
Richelieu,” he said.

“_Huit rue Richelieu_,” the Frenchman said to the chauffeur.

“Thank you,” Kendall said, and took the hand which the Frenchman
extended cordially.

“It makes nothing, monsieur. I am delighted to serve _Monsieur
l’Officier Américain.... Bon soir, monsieur! Bonne chance!_”

Kendall’s heart was warmed by the little courtesy. It was a sort of
welcome to him. It surprised him, rather, for in America one does not
expect assistance to leap to one from a crowd of strangers. He was soon
to learn that it was different in France; that all Paris seemed to be on
the lookout to be of service to American soldiers, on the lookout almost
to the point of embarrassment. He was to discover that the heart of
France had a very special niche set aside for Americans. Even though it
had already a saying, “_Tous les Américaines sont fous_,” it loved them
for their very madness....

The little taxi rattled and strained at breath-taking speed around the
corner, across the Pont Royale, under the arches which allow a street to
pass through the Louvre (though he did not know it was the Louvre), past
the Comédie Française, and finally brought up with a lurch before the
building that had been the Palais Royal Hôtel before the coming of the
Americans.

Here he registered, passed through a lobby filled with American officers
and sergeants and corporals and privates—for in this one spot in all
France military rank ceases to exist and men are not soldiers, but
university men—and up-stairs to the Bureau of the University of
Michigan.... In half an hour he was in a comfortable room with windows
which opened upon a balcony facing toward the east.... He stepped out
upon it and gazed into the darkness. Scarcely a hundred feet away,
across a narrow street, was the dark bulk of a mammoth building, and the
black silhouettes of a multitude of quaint chimney-pots.... It was the
ancient Royal Palace. Kendall did not realize this, nor that his eyes
were gazing at a spot rich in history, in intrigue, in romance—and not
unbaptized with blood.... But one thing he knew—at last he was in the
heart of Paris....




                               CHAPTER II


Captain Ware felt singularly young, boyishly exhilarated, as he walked
out early next morning for his first view of Paris. It was not yet eight
o’clock, but the day was beautiful, promising warmth; the skies were
clear; the whole appearance of things one of perfect peace and quiet.
The city did not seem one threatened by war. The streets, as he walked
up the rue de Rivoli, were almost deserted. It was early for Parisians
to be abroad.

The city astounded him, captivated him, gave him a feeling of humility.
He was familiar with Detroit, had seen Chicago and New York, but
Paris—Paris was different. His experience gave him nothing with which to
compare it. Chicago and New York were unsightly upheavals; the fantastic
work of tremendous industrial forces in irresistible motion. They
reared. Paris did not rear; it reposed; it had not been upheaved
tumultuously—it had been dreamed and dreamed by genius which
comprehended beauty.

The city affected him almost to breathlessness as it opened before him
when he passed the ancient grayness of the Louvre. He turned to the left
and stood between the wide jaws of the Louvre, the mouth of the Place du
Carrousel, and, standing there, looked westward through the reaches of
the Tuileries and beyond to where, silhouetted with massive grandeur,
uprose Napoleon’s Arc de Triomphe.... It was impossible—incredibly
magnificent. At that instant began the first great change in his life.
He might not consciously have dated it from that instant, and possibly
he never dated it at all, but Paris had set the hand of her beauty upon
him; her spell had touched him with its magic.

“Why,” he said to himself, “anything could happen here!” And presently,
“The Germans drop bombs on this ... they try to destroy this.”

For the first time came an appreciation, not yet a full appreciation,
but far more than an inkling, that a great event had overtaken him: he
had left the Middle West behind him; he felt that he was not only about
to see, but to be a part of, a new and wonderful mode of life and of
thought. There came to him a hint that there might be something to life
besides merely living it. Though he did not know the phrase, he felt
something of the meaning it bears—_Joie de vivre_. Later he would,
perhaps, appreciate a remark made to him by a French officer. “It is not
_savoir faire_ that is the great knowledge, it is _savoir vivre_.” It is
not so important to know how to conduct oneself as it is to know how to
make the most of life....

He retraced his steps to the rue de Rivoli, stopped to regard the golden
Jeanne d’Arc about which he said to himself that he would have liked it
better if it had been bronze or marble, and that the sculptor had made
Jeanne “huskier” than he had pictured her to himself. That was the word
he used—“huskier.” Somehow he had always conceived Jeanne d’Arc—what
slight conception he had of her—as rather anemic and thin and
fragile.... His conception of Jeanne was like the conception many good
Americans have made for themselves of France. Two millions of them would
soon be on French soil to see for themselves that it was not an anemic,
fragile country, but robust, healthy, capable not only of visions, but
of battles....

He walked on to pause again in the Place de la Concorde and to marvel at
such prodigality of open space in the very heart of a great city. He
even tried to calculate to himself the money worth of so many acres in
the retail section of New York, say along Fifth Avenue from
Thirty-fourth Street north and west.... It was a typical American
calculation. Beyond him the Champs Élysées reached on, climbing its
little gradient to the Arc dc Triomphe. It was splendid and beautiful.
It “got under his skin,” as he phrased it.

He stood there looking off across the river toward the Chamber of
Deputies, over the roof of which could be seen the dome of Napoleon’s
Tomb. Then he turned and surveyed the path he had just traversed, that
reach of low, symmetrical buildings facing the Jardin des Tuileries. He
was not exactly inarticulate, but he was not eloquent. “I’ll be damned,”
he said under his breath. “Well, I’ll be damned.”

Now he was hungry, and, walking more rapidly, he returned to the
University Union to find the dining-room open and a few American
officers at _petit déjeuner_. For the most part they were eating bread
and confiture and washing it down with chocolate. A few were taking the
American breakfast, actually eating _two eggs_ and other food—a thing to
convince the Parisian that these visitors were indeed mad, or at least
barbarians.

“Yea, _boy_!” said a loud voice, just as Captain Ware was endeavoring to
give his order to one of the two pretty French girls who were the
waitresses. It was his first sight of the Parisienne, and it had rather
surprised him. They did not wear short skirts and high-heeled slippers,
with more than enough black-stockinged ankle to regard. They had not
saucy eyes and _rétroussé_ noses, nor did they whisk about
flirtatiously. They were pretty, indeed they were charming, but they
were quiet, even subdued, and they looked _nice_. That was a good
American word he could apply to them. He liked their looks, even if they
failed to come up to his ideas of what a French waitress should be.

He looked up from the pad on which he had been checking off the _petit
déjeuner_, to see facing him across the table, in a captain’s uniform
and Sam Brown belt which made him almost unrecognizable, a man with whom
he had been more than friendly through four years in Ann Arbor.

“Bert Stanley!” he exclaimed, jumping to his feet and extending his
hand.

“They all come here,” said Stanley to himself, “all of them—if you just
wait long enough.... When did you land?”

“Day before yesterday.”

“And got to Paris so soon? How did you work that?”

“Ordered.... What are you doing here?”

“Making marks on pieces of paper. That’s what I got for knowing anything
about architectural engineering. I’m in the Signal Corps and I’m drawing
plans for aeroplane-sheds.... What are you?” He looked down at Kendall’s
collar markings.

“Intelligence! I’m one of the fellows who find out everything about
everything in the world and tell it to the army for its good.”

“Stationed here?”

“Don’t know. Report this morning.”

“Fix it, son, fix it.... It’s a great _guerre_, and this battle of
Paris—”

“_Beurre, monsieur?_” asked the waitress.

“Eh? What’s that?”

“She wants to know,” explained Stanley, with exaggerated patience, “if
you want butter. It’s extra.”

Kendall signified his desire for butter. “I’ve just been out looking at
the town,” he said. “The fellows that built it knew what they were
doing, didn’t they?”

“They knew how to do a lot of things. Staying here, of course.”

“Didn’t know where else to go. You, too?”

“Have been a month, but if I’m going to live here for the duration, and
it looks as if I were, I’d like to get somebody and take a little
apartment somewhere.... Over in the Quartier Latin or up on one of the
streets off the Étoile. Have some comfort. Live cheaper, too. Get a cook
for sixty or seventy francs, and be regular people.... Say, if you’re
set down in Paris, come on in with me.”

“Sounds reasonable,” said Kendall, tentatively. “Haven’t the least idea
what they’ll do with me, though.”

“Well, you run up and see, and, whatever happens, meet me here at half
past six and I’ll take you to a regular place to eat, and then we’ll go
out and look at the sights.”

“You’re on,” said Kendall, “bigger than a house.”

Captain Ware had hoped to be assigned to active duty with a combat unit.
He had studied and trained himself for the duties of an intelligence
officer at the front, and for months had looked forward with enthusiasm
to those interesting and invaluable duties which such an officer
performs. He was not a young man to welcome a desk job or to be
contented with a position in the Safety of the Service of Supplies
region. In that he resembled thousands of other young officers whose
fortune it would never be to hear a cannon fired in battle, to take part
in a charge, or to be nearer to the front than some small town in the
interior of France. None of them had chosen their places. They had been
sent where they were most needed and where their work was essential to
the victories to be won against the enemy.... Captain Ware, like these
others, must perform the task set for him, wherever it might lie—hoping
always for a new assignment that should carry him to the dugout and to
the trench. It was, therefore, with grievous disappointment that he
learned he was to be stationed in Paris, apparently in permanence. He
could still hope, for in the army in France no man can tell what
to-morrow will bring him. Orders come and men go.... Somehow it did not
seem possible to him that he would thus go to war without going to war;
that he should journey across the ocean to this mightiest of all
conflicts without the experience of battle....

At half after six he was again at the Union, where he found Bert Stanley
waiting for him in the lounge, whiling away the time very pleasantly in
conversation with charming Annette of the pert face, white teeth, and
busy chatter—a chatter made up in very large part of excellent American
idiom learned from the patrons of the cigar-and-candy case of which she
was custodian. Hundreds of American officers will return to their
country after the war with pleasant memories of wise little Annette, the
little French girl who sold cigarettes and candy and wrist watches and
post-cards at the stand in the Union.

Kendall ascended to his room in the queer little elevator whose
conductor was a tiny Belgian boy, proud of a few words of American, and
presently walked down the five flights—for in France it is not
considered good manners in war-time to use an elevator for descent—and
rejoined Stanley.

“Well,” said Stanley, “what luck?”

“It looks like Paris for mine,” said Kendall, still depressed by his
disappointment.

“Might be worse.... Might have been Chaumont.”

They walked north on the rue de Richelieu, past the Molière fountain,
and by the door of Marty’s which Kendall was to know very well later on.
At the rue St.-Marc they turned to the left until the Opéra Comique
uprose before them, and then made their way into the up-stairs
dining-room of the Café Poccardi on rue Favart.

“It’s early. The crowd doesn’t show up before seven-thirty, so we can
get a table up front where we can see the show,” said Stanley. “Besides,
there’s a waiter there who speaks English.”

They found seats with their backs toward the windows, a point of vantage
from which they could view the large, mirrored room with its rows of
small, closely set tables. Only a few were occupied, but gradually the
patrons straggled in—a truly Parisian gathering. There were handsome men
in officers’ uniforms with many gold service stripes on the sleeve, and
some with two, three, or even four wound chevrons on the opposite
sleeve. They were accompanied by well-dressed women, mostly young,
always very neat.... It was their shoes that demanded Kendall’s
attention. This was a matter that had been impressing itself upon him
through the day—that the Parisienne knew how to dress her feet. There
were _poilus_ on leave, each with his girl, or even with two girls.
There were one or two old but immaculate men with women young enough to
be their granddaughters. A few women entered alone and seated themselves
quietly at tables to await their partners—perhaps the café was their
place of rendezvous.... Two women, beautifully dressed in black, with
widows’ veils, occupied a table just across from Kendall and his
companion. They were very young, and one was remarkably lovely.... The
sight rather depressed Kendall. This was one of the meanings of war—this
youthful widowhood! Here was the cruelty of it, the bitterness of it!

“France must be filled with widows,” he said to Stanley.

Bert grinned. “Camouflage,” he said.

“What do you mean?”

“If you’re thinking about our friends opposite, don’t get too
sympathetic. They’re no more widows than I am. Camouflage. It’s the
style. But they’re overdoing it. Everybody’s next, now, even us
Americans. Bait, sonny, bait, that’s what it is.”

Bert looked over at the widows and smiled, and the lovelier one smiled
in reply, not brazenly, not with the red-lipped, painted-cheeked smile
of the Anglo-Saxon siren, but demurely, pleasantly, as if she were
merely returning his smile out of courtesy and from an abundance of
gentle good nature.

“See?” said Bert.

“But they look _nice_.” Again Kendall used that word.

“They are nice.... This isn’t Terre Haute, son.”

Everybody was drinking wine, Kendall noticed. It was universal, and as
the meal progressed he spoke about it.

“Everybody is going to the wine,” he said, “but nobody gets noisy.”

“Nobody does,” said Bert. “Do we get noisy at home when we drink
coffee?”

Kendall watched. He saw a man half fill his companion’s glass with red
wine, then pour in as much water as there was wine. This, he saw, was
almost universally done.... Conversation was animated. There was gay
laughter and lightness, but it was not the gaiety of wine.

At a table well within view sat two _poilus_ with their wives or
sweethearts. Kendall watched them, for it was by far the jolliest, least
restrained party in the room.... And then he saw the larger soldier
throw his arm around the neck of his buxom companion and kiss her
soundly.... It rather shocked him. The idea of demonstrative affection
in, for instance, the dining-room of the McAlpin, or in one of the
better-class cafés of Detroit, was impossible to entertain. He watched
for a waiter to protest, perhaps to eject the couple from the place....
But there were only tolerant smiles when any notice whatever was taken
of the event.... And it was an event which was repeated—the sound of
hearty smacks coming even to Kendall’s ear.... He saw other men come in,
and before they sat down beside waiting companions they would stoop to
salute with a kiss.... The thing was not universal, not even general,
but there was enough of it for him to become aware that it was not
exceptional.... But for all that, it made him feel embarrassed and
uncomfortable. Apparently, if people had kissing to do they simply did
it.... He was to recognize this later as one manifestation of the frank,
unaffected genuineness of the people. Now it seemed rather gross to him,
gross and exotic. The idea did not occur to him then that it was he with
his American notions and antecedents, with his inheritances from
Plymouth Rock, that was exotic.

He wondered who all these people were; he wondered if they were
_married_. Were these men and women husbands and wives, or were the
women those mysterious, very French, somewhat exciting persons whom he
had read about in novels and who were called _mistresses_?

He did not put the question to Stanley because he was afraid of
appearing provincial. He might as well have done so, for in all
probability Stanley, with all of his month’s experience in Paris, was
pondering the same matter.... Anyhow, he felt that he was seeing life;
that he was beholding things which he could tell about later to
interested audiences.... It is a peculiarity of the Anglo-Saxon mind
that everything which is strange to it appears to it as necessarily
tinged with naughtiness.

At another table, over to Kendall’s left, two girls were eating alone,
and he watched them with interest and considerable curiosity, wondering
who and what they were. One of them attracted him particularly. She was
young, in the neighborhood of twenty, he judged. She was dressed in
white, a suit of some knit material that reminded him of a light jersey,
and on her very black and wavy hair was a shapeless white cap of the
tam-o-’shanter variety. Her skin was a delightful olive, and her eyes
black, with shadows under them. She was not beautiful, unless her eyes
made her so. She was small and almost thin. She addressed herself to her
food in a very business-like manner, not often looking up from her
plate, but once in a while she smiled as she replied to some comment of
her companion, and her teeth were very white and regular. There was no
appearance of wealth about her, but every feature spoke of
intelligence—indeed, of a certain keenness.... She was very attractive.

“Look,” he said to Bert. “I wonder who she is. She looks as if she had
‘class.’”

“Pretty kid,” said Bert, who, just then, was more interested in _poule
au riz_ than in Parisiennes.

He continued to stare, unconscious of his rudeness, until she lifted her
eyes to his. For a moment she regarded him, with no especial interest,
certainly with no sign which could be interpreted as provocative, and
dropped her eyes again to her plate.... Kendall was conscious at once of
disappointment and satisfaction. Here was another girl that he had
estimated as “nice,” and this time, apparently, he was right.

In a moment he heard her name, for her companion uttered it. “Andree.”
Somehow it suited her, Kendall thought, and he thought, too, that it was
a decidedly pretty name ... “Andree.”

From time to time, as he was finishing his dinner, Kendall glanced at
Andree. But he did not meet her eyes again. She was not interested in
him, apparently, and even when he walked past her table on his way out
she did not look up or manifest by a sign that she was conscious of his
existence.

“Where now?” he said as they debouched onto the broad Boulevard des
Italiens.

“Might as well take in the ‘Folies Bergère.’ It’s one of the sights.”

They walked along in silence, crossing the boulevard and turning up a
narrow street toward the theater. Kendall continued to think about the
little girl with the black eyes. Somehow she had made an impression of
some sort upon him. He could not have described it nor estimated it. All
he knew was that he liked her looks immensely and was curious about her.
Probably he would never see her again, but he found himself hoping that
he might.

They bought tickets for the “Folies” and entered, traversing the large
hall filled with tables at which the audience was expected to refresh
itself between the acts, or even during the performance, and, after
buying programs, were conducted to their seats by a girl usher who stood
sternly by until she received her tip—a tip that she would have
suggested if it had not been tendered.

Then the performance began—a very disappointing performance to a
Middle-Western young man who had heard tales of the naughtiness of the
French stage. It turned out to be a rather clumsy musical comedy which
was more vaudeville than either music or comedy. It was not naughty at
all, he said to himself—but perhaps that was because he failed to
understand the dialogue. Anyhow, he had seen much franker costumes and
much more suggestive incident in Mr. Ziegfeld’s “Follies” or at the
Winter Garden.

The audience was more than half American; the music was adapted from
American shows, and between the acts a jazz orchestra, “straight from
Broadway,” made the ears ring. Everybody got up between the acts and
promenaded or sat at the little tables.... Girls wandered about and
spoke to one, and made Kendall feel uncomfortable and embarrassed again.
He was glad when they returned to their seats.

The performance rather bored him, and he suggested leaving. Bert was
ready, too, so they sauntered out onto the dark streets, making their
way to the Avenue de l’Opéra and past the huge bulk of that wonderful
building which France had erected even while she was paying to Germany
the billion-franc indemnity exacted after 1870. Once or twice soft
voices accosted them out of the darkness, but they walked on toward the
Union, and presently were ordering ice-cream and listening to a
lieutenant play ragtime on the piano.

Then, suddenly, the air was rent by a startling, metallic shriek, a
long-sustained, nerve-twanging, raucous blast.

“Raid!” said Stanley, getting to his feet.

“Bomb raid?” asked Kendall, instantly excited.

“Yes. Let’s go out and take a look.”

So, with characteristic foolhardiness, they sallied out and hurried up
the rue de Rivoli to the Place de la Concorde, where they sat on a stone
balustrade and waited. They were not alone. About that open space were
scattered a dozen Americans impelled by absurd curiosity—a curiosity
they would discard very shortly and become more circumspect in their
behavior as well as more respectful toward the _Gothas_.

Still the _alerte_ sounded, more terrifying than the sound of the
barrage which was presently to begin. Sirens mounted on fire-engines
were giving the alarm, tearing madly through the black streets, and with
horrid voice commanding Paris to seek sanctuary in _abri_ or in the
tunnels of the Metropolitan.

Kendall was not frightened; he was hardly apprehensive. Even when the
guns opened toward the north and he could see bright star-flashes as
shrapnel burst high above, he was only exhilarated and very interested.
The thing did not seem serious to him. But it _was_ serious, he knew. It
was war, and such barbarous war as held the world in a spell of horror.
Presently the air was filled with the crashes of cannon, and one could
trace the course of the enemy by the spreading of the ring of fire about
the city.... Once in a while would come a deep, dull, thunderous _boom_,
as a bomb, released by a _Gotha_, would fall in the distant suburbs,
perhaps upon the home of some laborer, burying himself with his wife and
babies in the ruins, or destroying them utterly so that no trace of
their human shell would ever be discovered.... The firing moved
westward, and then swung around to the south as the hostile aeroplanes
strove vainly to penetrate the city.... This continued for half an hour.
Then there was a time of quietness, after which came the pleasant voices
of bugles notifying a cowering population that all was clear.... The
raid had been abortive—it had succeeded in killing only half a dozen
defenseless civilians!

Kendall and Stanley walked back to the Union—to have another dish of
ice-cream. As they walked up-stairs in the darkness Kendall said to his
friend: “I wonder who that girl was ... the one in the restaurant. Her
name was Andree.”




                              CHAPTER III


Kendall Ware had been two weeks in Paris; he had learned many things,
absorbed many things, but as his observations grew he discovered depths
to his ignorance that were not apparent to him on the day of his
arrival. The greatest advance he made in those first weeks was in
arriving at a knowledge of how little he understood or was equipped to
understand of France—and when he said _France_ he did not mean a
country, but the people who inhabited the country. Continually he was
amused by superficialities; daily he was impressed by profundities.
Gradually he came to perceive that one cannot know France by looking at
the surface any more than one can gather a knowledge of what is
transpiring in the ocean by sailing a little boat over its waves.

A people which can produce Joan of Arc and Robespierre, a St. Louis and
a Louis the Eleventh, a Madame Roland and a Madame du Barry, a
Clemenceau and a Calliaux; which is capable of an 1870 and of a 1914, of
the Terror and of Verdun—is not one whose complexities can be solved by
a twenty-six-year-old American in fourteen days.... The American will
make no impression on France, but France will make a profound impression
on the American.

From being interested in a city, in its buildings and its beauties,
Kendall became interested in its people.

His first reaction to the people was rather romantic. He saw romance in
every one. Hotel porters with one arm, wearing the Croix de Guerre and
the Légion d’Honneur, and perhaps the Médaille Militaire excited him.
Each one was, in truth, a hero. These men had seen and done. Now they
worked at menial tasks, still wearing uniforms, and with those medals on
the breast which raised them into the aristocracy of manhood. It was
strange to him that a man could be at once an honored hero and a
porter.... _Liberté, Égalité, Fraternité_ were inscribed on every public
building. This was one of the manifestations of Liberty, Equality,
Brotherhood. These things really existed, and so a porter could be a
decorated hero.

If one addressed a taxi-driver one called him _Monsieur_, just as if one
were addressing the President of the Republic itself. One addressed the
_gendarmes_ as _Monsieur_. One addressed even the turbaned and besashed
and betrousered Moroccan street-sweepers as _Monsieur_ if one addressed
them at all. Monsieur Poincaré or Monsieur Clemenceau would have given
them the same salutation. It was not an affectation; it was not what
strangers have called French politeness. It was but a manifestation of
Liberty, Equality, Brotherhood. At first it had seemed rather absurd to
Kendall, American and republican though he was, but he grew to like it,
and somewhat to understand it.

Everywhere he saw heroes wearing medals. It made him feel insignificant
and somehow lacking. One could not walk a block without passing officer
or _poilu_ with the red ribbon of the Legion of Honor, or the rarer,
even more precious, broad yellow stripe of the Military Medal. The
narrow green stripe of the ribbon of the War Cross was everywhere.
Sometimes the ribbons were elongated to give space to two or three, or,
as was the case with one boyish officer, to eight palms.... And every
palm the token that its bearer had fought back out of the clutch of
Death, performing some act of valor which raised him above the level of
an army of heroes....

These soldiers were the first to command Kendall’s interest, but it
expanded to cover every one. Ancient drivers of _voitures_ whose horses
were always too tired to take him where he wanted to go; the chauffeurs
of taxi-cabs who could never understand his French, and who, when he had
made them understand, told him they could not take him to his
destination because they happened to be heading the other way; the
crowds who occupied the tables under the awnings on the sidewalks of the
rue de la Paix or the rue Royale; the old women who came to collect two
sous if one took a seat along the Champs Élysées or the Avenue du Bois
de Boulogne; the soldiers, French, Belgian, Italian, Austrian, Canadian,
English, Moroccan, American, who promenaded of evenings and Sundays from
the Place de la Concorde to Rond-Point, and the girls with whom they
promenaded—all these interested him, and each, as he studied them with
boyish _naïveté_, added something to his education.

He worked hard by day, and often far into the night, but for the most
part his evenings were free to investigate life with Bert Stanley, whose
investigations were merely of the surface and were rather questings for
an hour of amusement.... Sometimes he played bridge with three other
Americans at the Union, but he liked best to stroll about the darkened
streets, without object or destination.

Little by little he added to his meager store of the language. When he
spoke to friends about securing an instructor they laughed at him. “Pick
it up.... Talk to people,” they told him. “Sit down on a bench along the
Champs Élysées and talk to a girl. They’re as eager to learn English as
you are French.... It’s better than a teacher—and a darned sight more
pleasant.”

He voiced his distaste for this suggestion. He had been but two weeks in
Paris, and very mistakenly had classified all the girls who promenade
the Champs Élysées in the evening as women of the streets. His natural
decency revolted at any contact, no matter how slight, with these.

“Nine out of ten of those little girls work in shops or offices,” Bert
told him. “You haven’t got ’em right, son.”

But Kendall was suspicious. He continued in that attitude until one
evening a little girl—she appeared not more than seventeen—sat rather
diffidently on the other end of his bench.

“Good night, monsieur,” she said, with quaint pronunciation.

He did not answer, but turned his back with a gesture of repulse.

“Oh, monsieur, please,” she said, timidly. “I am not a bad girl....
See.” She turned her face so that the dim light shone upon it and
pointed to her cheeks. “There is not paint. You see. No.... I am a good
girl, but monsieur, I am—how do you say _solitaire_? I learn English....
It will not harm monsieur if I talk with him a little and learn
English.”

Kendall regarded her. She was a little thing with clear eyes and a
rather pretty face, whose cheeks, as she pointed out, were guiltless of
paint. She was not well dressed, though she was neat, _chic_. And she
was so young.... It was apparent to him that she told the truth, and his
manner changed toward her.

They talked. It was a conversation which would have aroused the mirth of
a listener ... but it was remarkable how well each made the other
understand; she with slowly pronounced French and a few words of quaint
English—he with his small stock of atrociously articulated French....
She worked in a chocolate-shop. She was a refugee from Soissons and an
orphan. Her two brothers had been killed at Verdun and her mother and
father had died of the war.

“Now I must make to work,” she said, simply. “But I am very _solitaire,
monsieur.... Oui, je suis trés-solitaire—trés-solitaire_.”

“Poor kid!” said Kendall.

She shrugged her shoulders and said, with that calm resignation which is
so much to be met with, “_C’est la guerre...._ It is the war.” That is a
phrase which explains everything, excuses anything in France to-day.
“_C’est la guerre._” One offers it to explain the lateness of trains,
the price of cheese, poverty, the lack of sugar, morale, everything
great or small. “_C’est la guerre_” is the countersign of the epoch. It
embraces everything.

After an hour she arose, offered her hand charmingly, and said good
night and “_Merci_.” Kendall sat looking after her, feeling the first
life movements of a comprehension of the womankind of France. From that
moment they assumed a higher place in his thoughts, not yet so high as
they deserved, but one rung nearer to the truth. He did not even begin
to understand them—not their philosophy of life nor their conception of
the relations between the sexes; but he began to ask himself questions
to which his education and prejudices and narrownesses could provide no
answer. He began to wonder if all he had heard were true; he began to
consider, if it were true, was it then necessarily evil. He had been
brought up to regard the drinking of any beverage containing alcohol as
inherently wicked and as something to be done surreptitiously and with a
sort of “devilish” feeling. Here everybody drank wine, and wine
contained alcohol, and they did it with no concealment and with no
thought that it could be other than normal and perfectly respectable. He
considered that, and from it attempted to form a judgment of other
things which to him seemed not as they should be. Apparently drinking in
France was not a thing of moral turpitude, done as it was done by the
French.... Perhaps, then, other matters were the same: evil in Detroit
because custom and inherited moral conceptions had made them so; right
in Paris because custom and inherited moral conceptions had made them
so.... Dimly he was feeling for the conception that an act in itself is
not a sin, but the manner of the performance of that act.... This may
have been sophistry; it may have been alarmingly faulty moral
philosophy, but it marked a step ahead for a young man come of such
parentage as Kendall came of. It marked a willingness to listen to
argument and to maintain an open mind. His mother, he considered, had
never maintained an open mind. She had been dogmatic. To inquire into
things was a sin to her. Nothing had been so quick to arouse her anger
as an impulse on his part to look for the reasons of things,
particularly religious things.... His father had not been like this.
True, he had not been of an inquiring turn of mind, but he had seen no
especial reason why somebody who wanted to inquire should not be allowed
to do so. There was a certain sweetness about his father, a tolerant
attitude toward life in general and toward transgressions in particular,
that came nearer to the attitude of Jesus Christ than did the hard,
unbending, dogmatic almost cruel religion of his mother.... He had
inherited from both parents; each had given him something distinctly
traceable to each, and both had joined to give him other qualities which
were a strange composite of both of them. He was inclined to judge at
first sight like his mother, harshly and dogmatically; he was inclined,
on second thought, to look for excuses and to forgive what must be
judged as evil, like his father. It was a quality composite of the
characters of his parents that he placed the abstraction of _goodness_
on a lofty throne, but was inclined to apply its laws with gentleness
and mercy rather than with narrowness and hardness.... There were days
when he was inclined to narrowness and dogmatism; there were days when
he bent quite in the other direction and became over-indulgent.

Following his first experience in conversation with a casually
encountered girl, and finding himself to have come off none the worse
for it, he repeated the experience several times, and enjoyed it, and
came to look forward to the evenings because of the possibility of a
pleasant and instructive talk with some girl he would never see again,
but from whom he would learn some French and considerable of France....
It was rarely that his sense of propriety was offended or that the
attitude of one of his chance companions was other than “nice.” He made
no effort to follow up any of these casual meetings, or to centralize
his attention upon a single girl. He preferred matters as they were. But
he was learning that the ordinary French girl did not resent being
accosted by an American, and that when he was lonely he might find
charming company without fear of being rebuffed.

On his third Sunday in Paris he was sitting among the trees that border
the Champs Élysées. He was lonesome, for Bert Stanley had been absent on
a mission for several days. He and Bert were sharing a room at the Union
now, a room with two beds, which cost them jointly ten francs a day—and
he missed Bert. He had lunched alone that noon and now did not know what
to do with himself. It was the first time he had been really homesick,
but now he was homesick and uneasy and rather at loose ends. He wished
something would happen; that some friend would appear with an
entertaining suggestion. So he sat and smoked and watched the passage of
the colorful crowd.

Presently he stiffened to interest. In the distance he saw approaching a
girl dressed in white. It was the white tam-o’-shanter that had caught
his eye. It was familiar. For a moment he could not remember where he
had seen it, or why it stirred him to interest, and then he recalled the
little girl of the Café Poccardi. He even remembered her name—“Andree.”
She came abreast of him and he identified her certainly. It was she, and
really more attractive than he had remembered her to be. She walked
along with little steps, her body very straight, her bearing very staid.
As she walked her eyes remained straight in front of her, as though her
mind were on some interest at her destination.... Her profile was
prettier than his first picture of her full face had been; there was a
daintiness about her lips and her straight little nose, and about the
whole of her. If one had been compelled to limit himself to a single
word in describing her, he would have been forced to use that word
“dainty.”

She passed, and his eyes followed her. Suddenly he stood up with a
resolution half formed, a resolution to speak to her. Then he hesitated.
She did not look like a person one speaks to without permission or
presentation. But it was a chance.... He was lonely and this was rather
an adventure, and, besides, he had learned that one is not often
rebuffed when making a casual advance. Still Kendall was a bit
apprehensive. He walked along behind her irresolute, wondering if he
dared, and keying up his courage to dare. At any rate, he would wait
until they were out of the crowd; he did not wish the embarrassment of
being rebuffed too publicly.

The girl tripped along, almost birdlike in the carriage of her head and
in the _ensemble_ of her daintiness. At the Place de la Concorde she
turned to her left up the rue Boissy d’Anglas, on one corner of which is
the Hôtel Crillon and on the other a high, blank wall of brick. The
street was deserted.

Kendall summoned his resolution and overtook her as she entered the
shadow of the brick wall. He was rather excited and apprehensive, and
stammered a bit as he lifted his hat and said in his best French, “_Bon
jour, mademoiselle_.”

She stopped suddenly and slowly raised her eyes to his face. She was not
startled, not frightened, not thrown from her poise in the least.

“_Bon jour, monsieur_,” she said, with a rising inflection, as one who
expresses surprise and inquiry.

Kendall was at a loss. He did not know how to proceed or how to make
plausible his action. What little French he knew departed from him, and
he stood awkwardly by her side, feeling very idiotic indeed. She waited
gravely, with no twinkle in her eye at the rather absurd figure he must
have presented.

“_Voulez-vous promenade avec moi?_” he managed to articulate, at last.

“_Pourquoi?_” she asked.

Why? Why should she promenade with him? He felt his face reddening, and
it was his impulse to clap on his cap and beat a hasty retreat. What
answer was there to that _why?_ He could think of nothing whatever to
say, and the pause became awkward.

“_Parlez-vous anglais?_” he asked, desperately.

“_Non._”

In sheer desperation he touched her arm and began walking. She walked
with him, the merest hint of an amused smile at the corners of her
mouth.... At any rate, she was walking with him. That much was
accomplished, but, now that he had progressed to this point, what was he
to do with her? She was difficult, and not inclined to help him in the
least.

“Mademoiselle,” he said, desperately, “I speak very little French. I am
very lonesome.” Then, of necessity, he lapsed into his own tongue. “Why
in thunder don’t you speak English!” he said, testily.

“Where are you going?” she asked.

“With you—if you permit,” he replied.

Again that appalling why. He was to come to know that she used it often;
that she shot it at one like an unexpected little arrow when one least
looked for it, and rather upset one with it. There came a time when he
called her Mademoiselle Pourquoi because of this. “Because—” he
answered. “Because— Oh, confound it! I don’t know why. I haven’t any
idea. No reason at all. I just want to.... Now if you could only
understand that we might get somewhere.”

She was amused—a little. She regarded him gravely, and it was apparent
that she was appraising him, satisfying herself as to what sort of a
barbarian he was, and possibly as to what he had in mind.

“Will you dine with me?” he asked. That was a phrase he had by heart.

“Why?”

“Same reason,” he said, ruefully, in English. “I’ve got to dine, you’ve
got to dine, we’ve got to dine.... _Pourquoi, pourquoi,
pourquoi—toujours vous dit pourquoi._” This was not remarkably excellent
French, but she comprehended, and for the first time she uttered a
little laugh. He amused her. From that moment they got along better,
for, apparently, she had appraised him as not dangerous.

She began to ask questions, not idly, he judged, but the better to
satisfy herself about him.

“Where do you live?”

He told her.

“You are an American?”

“Yes.”

“From what city?”

“Detroit.”

“I do not know it.... What is your grade?” She meant his military rank.

“Captain.”

“Are you married?”

He had rather been expecting that question, for it had been put to him
by almost every girl he had talked to. Apparently it was an important
question.... In a land where so many, many young men have been
sacrificed to war an unmarried man is an important personage. He offers
possibilities. Suppose that one million, two millions of men of
marriageable age have been slaughtered, there remain at home one or two
millions of young women who have no one to marry. This, in France, is
not a theory, but a condition, a very real and very terrible condition.
A million girls of an age for marriage and no men!...

“No,” he said.

She was silent while they walked the greater part of a block. He
repeated again his well-learned phrase, “Will you dine with me?”

“Yes,” she said, in the tone of one making a decision of some moment.
“Where?”

“Anywhere you wish.”

They were just passing a little café not distant from the Madeleine, and
she stopped hesitatingly, rather speculatively, and there was a subdued
twinkle in her eye.

“Here?” she asked.

She was looking for information about this young American, and this was
an experiment. The cafe was one of the most expensive in Paris, and
doubtless Andree wanted to see how he would act at her suggestion, for
reckless spending of money is a thing which your Parisian does not
indulge in. Possibly she wanted to find out just how much she attracted
him, and one way to do it was to discover if he was willing to spend
money on her. It is not impossible that she wondered a bit if he had
lots of money, as all Americans are said to do. Your Frenchwoman is not
mercenary, but she is practical—and lots of money is an excellent thing
to have.

“All right,” he said, in perfect innocence, for he had never seen the
place before. It looked rather dingy and not especially attractive. It
was very small. So they went in. There was a passage down the middle of
the room, with tables on either side, set in solid rows. The waiter
moved a table out to admit Andree to the leather bench which ran along
the wall. Kendall waited for the table to be replaced so that he could
sit across from her, American fashion, but she motioned for him to sit
by her side. Young women and men in France sit side by side, not
_vis-a-vis_—and it is a custom not without its advantages.

Ordering was a difficult matter, first because of lack of the language,
and second because he was beginning to be very anxious to please this
girl and to make a favorable impression on her. With characteristic
American generosity or love of displaying his willingness to spend, he
would have ordered more than four could have eaten, but she interfered
and took the ordering into her own hands—a thing for which he was
grateful when the check was presented.... Even when she was making an
experiment she could not bear to see money actually wasted.

Kendall studied her covertly. She impressed him as being a grave, very
self-possessed young person. The word demure conceals in its meaning
something of the provocative. If it were possible to remove that shade
of meaning from it, then it would have described Andree exactly. She was
demure without being provocative.... And how pretty she was. She grew on
one. Those heavily shadowed eyes were really beautiful, and her lips
delicately sweet. He made up his mind that she was what he had been
accustomed to designate as a lady, which was but another way of saying
“nice.”

Out of the corner of his eye he watched her eat. She was very dainty
about it, but also very interested. Indeed, she ate in a thoroughly
business-like manner, giving her attention fully to her plate. He
thought of a bird. Indeed, there was something birdlike about her, but
what bird she resembled Kendall could not determine. Possibly it was a
composite resemblance.... He liked her very much, but was puzzled by
her. She was something quite outside his experience. Her manner puzzled
him. She was not what he would have called “offish.” She did not seem
wholly at her ease, yet she was much more so than he. She was gravely
expectant; concealing herself, perhaps, while she waited for
self-disclosure on the part of Kendall.

She would drink but a fraction of a glass of wine and declined a
cigarette at the end of the meal.... Then he called for the check and
discovered that the rather light repast was to cost him seventy francs.
He wondered if Andree were accustomed to eating seventy-franc meals, not
knowing that this was the first experience of the kind she had ever had.
Seventy francs would have sufficed nearly for her food for a month....
On the whole, she was a mystery to him, and as long as he knew her she
continued to remain something of a mystery. He was incapable of solving
her.

“Now what shall we do?” he asked.

“We shall walk,” she replied, in quaintly stilted and accented English.
The effect was charming.

“Eh?” said Kendall. “You—why, you said you didn’t speak English!”

“Yes,” she said, and smiled, but offered no explanation. But the
explanation was clear, even to Kendall. It was because she was making no
admission whatever about herself in those first few minutes. It was
because she was on the brink of a new experience, was meeting her first
American, and because she wanted to find out as much as she could about
him without permitting him to learn anything whatever of her—until she
was ready to permit it.... He was pleased. Evidently her judgment was
favoring him.

“That’s fine,” he said. “Now you can teach me French and I can teach you
English.”

“Maybe,” she said, with her reserved smile. “We shall see.”

“Let’s take a taxi out to the Bois de Boulogne,” he suggested.

“It is very expensive.... It is not _nécessaire_. No, we shall walk.”

They retraced their steps to the Place de la Concorde and walked slowly
up the Champs Élysées to the Étoile, and then diagonally to the left and
so along the Avenue du Bois de Boulogne, that wonderful promenade so
dear to Parisians. There they found chairs beside the broad graveled
walk and seated themselves. They had progressed very well
conversationally, for, though Andree’s English was but little more
extensive than Kendall’s French, the two supplemented each other
splendidly. A little pocket dictionary which Kendall always carried
worked wonders. The little dictionary was a splendid thing, anyway. It
grew to be a little joke between them and they laughed over it gaily;
Andree became less restrained.

Kendall would start a sentence in French and arrive at a point
impassable. Neither English nor French could supply his meaning.
“_Attendez_,” he would say, with mock solemnity, and then would produce
the little book, and with heads close together in the dusk they would
search it for the word. When they found it Andree would laugh at
Kendall’s pronunciation of it.... The dictionary was a great promoter of
acquaintance.

He was more and more curious about her. He wanted to know who she was,
and what she did, and if she worked for her living, and where she lived,
but he could not screw up his courage to direct questions, and she
volunteered nothing.

Finally she said, “I must be at my home, for every day I have very much
work.”

“What do you work at?” he asked, brashly.

“I must study. Many, many hours every day I must study.”

“What are you studying?”

“Many things.... I must study much, much, for the time is not long....
So I must be at my home _now_.” She pointed down at the ground with a
pretty gesture, a childish gesture, the first manifestation of the sort
she had shown him. “I must be at my home _now_—at this minute. Make me
to be there—instantly.” Then she laughed gleefully.

What a charming little thing she was, he thought, and was enchanted by
her.

“_Nous cherchons un taxi_,” he said, trying out his French. Apparently
he did reasonably well, for she shook her head.

“It is not _nécessaire_. No, I shall go on the Metro.... Good-by.”

“But—oh, now listen. I’m to go home with you, of course. And we must see
each other often—to learn French and English, you know.... You’re not
going to send me away now.”

She considered a moment.

“You may come with me—_some_.... When I say, then you shall tell me good
night. Do you promise?”

“Yes,” he said, “but—”

She arose and he accompanied her to the nearest station of the
Metropolitan, into which they descended, he very curious to know where
they were proceeding, and entered a passageway labeled “_Direction
Châtelet_.” The train was crowded and there was little opportunity for
speech until they changed to take another subterranean train which
discharged them at Place St.-Michel—the heart of the Quartier Latin.

So, Kendall thought, she is a student and she lives in the Latin
Quarter! There was magic in that thought, romance in it; the very fact
of her residence in that fascinating quarter of the city gave her a
higher valuation.

They entered the big lift which should have carried them to the street,
but the lift declined to rise. They waited amid bursts of laughter from
the crowd, and then everybody marched off again in perfect good
nature—indeed, rather delighted at a little adventure, for the old
soldier who operated the elevator had dined too well that Sunday
evening, and in his abounding good spirits had forgotten how to operate
his machine. The crowd trudged up-stairs, laughing, not at all peevish
as an American crowd in like circumstances would have been; indeed, they
were rather in sympathy with the old fellow. Just as they arrived at the
top of the stairs the elevator came slowly into view, the conductor
stepped off with the air of one who had done a noteworthy thing. He
removed his hat and bowed low to the company.

“_Regardez!_” he said, magnificently. “_Voilà.... Voilà!_”

Andree laughed prettily and Kendall laughed, and they were advanced
another step in their acquaintance by the little incident.

The streets were black as they emerged, and Andree took his arm, leading
him diagonally across the Place, past the fountain, and up the Boulevard
St.-Michel—the “Boul’ Miche” of fable and story. She permitted him to
accompany her for a few blocks, then she halted.

“It is here you must go,” she said. “You must go now.”

“But—”

“Your promise!”

He acquiesced. “I shall see you again?” He essayed the thing in French,
“_Voulez-vous donnez moi un rendez-vous, mademoiselle?_”

“No, no, no, no. It is not so. Écoutez. The right way to say is this,
_Voulez-vous me donnerai un rendez-vous?_ It is the future time, do you
onderstan’?... You wish to see me again?”

“Yes.”

“_Pourquoi?_”

“Mademoiselle Pourquoi.” It was the first time he called her so.

It was a liberty, perhaps, but it pleased her, for she gave a little
laugh. “You really wish to see me again?”

“Yes, really.... I want to see you—to beat the band.”

“To beat the band?... What is that, monsieur? I do not onderstan’, oh, I
do not onderstan’.” She had a way of failing to understand with despair
in her voice and her gestures that was very charming.

“_L’argot américain_,” he explained. “American slang. It means I want to
see you very much.”

“It is well.”

“When?... To-morrow? _Demain?_”

“I cannot to see you to-morrow, for I must work, as I said. _Mais_ in
the evening, yes. _Sept heure et demi._ Do you onderstan’? In the Place
St.-Michel, _près de la fontaine_.”

“At half past seven near the St.-Michel fountain.... And you will be
there—_certainement_?”

“_Oui—et vous?_”

“_Certainement_—surely—you bet,” he said, with increasing emphasis.

She held out her hand. “_Bonne nuit, monsieur._”

“Good night, mademoiselle.... To-morrow evening at half past seven.”

“Yes,” she said, and disappeared into the darkness.




                               CHAPTER IV


Kendall stood a moment looking after Andree until the blackness of the
boulevard swallowed her up. He was exhilarated. The girl had had a tonic
effect upon him; the incident was not an incident, but an adventure, and
he tingled with it.... He wondered why. He wondered why he wanted to see
her again when he had not cared whether or not he saw again any of the
other girls he had talked to. He hoped she would appear next evening as
she had promised ... and then he felt a twinge of apprehension. The
twinge was not an inheritance from his father.

If he did see her again—then what? Would he see her again and still
again, and what were the meetings to lead to? What sort of affair was he
getting mixed into?... He felt a sense of naughtiness, and, when he
tried to discover why he should feel naughty, he was unable to say.
Certainly there had been nothing in the least to warrant it in any word
or action of the evening. But Andree was French—and she lived in the
Latin Quarter.... What _was_ he getting himself into, anyhow?

The part of his being inherited from his mother was in the ascendant.
She suspected anything she did not understand. Because she did not
understand it she believed something wicked must lurk in it
somewhere.... He remembered how he had once dug a cave in a vacant lot
next his home and how his mother had almost gone into one of her
“tantrums” over it. She could not understand why a boy should want to
burrow into the earth. It must be some squalid desire for wicked
concealment on her son’s part. She almost convinced him that it was a
sin for a boy to dig a cave, just as she had almost succeeded in making
him believe that so many of his other perfectly natural desires and
impulses and doings were wicked.... She had a way of connecting
everything with _sex_, and she suspected _sex_ above everything else in
the world. It was her nightmare. It was a squalid, wicked sort of a
thing, to be thought of only in terms of aversion. Always she had
hammered this into him, and though he could not quite believe her, he
never quite outgrew her point of view. In this moment he knew exactly
how she would regard his meeting with Andree.

Then his father came to his rescue—his father, whose dominant note was
tolerance and a sweet inability to see evil, or, if he saw it, to see
palliation of it, or even a vein of goodness running through it. His
father never suspected anything or anybody. His father had never
suspected _him_. Somehow that had always been very wonderful to him,
because his mother had impressed it upon him that he was a person always
under suspicion. He knew exactly how his father would regard Andree and
what he would say and do. He could hear his father saying it and see him
doing it. His father would have patted Andree on the shoulder and
smiled. He would have said, “She’s a pretty little thing, isn’t she?”
Then he would have proposed taking Andree and his son for an ice-cream
soda. His father always did that—for ice-cream soda or candy. And then
he would have whispered in Kendall’s ear: “Got enough money, son? ’Cause
if you hain’t—”

Kendall wondered if it were better to see wickedness in everything and
sometimes to be justified by finding it, or to see wickedness in nothing
at all, and sometimes to be disappointed by having it suddenly thrust
upon one.

He walked slowly toward the Place St.-Michel and there descended into
the Metro. His antagonistic inheritances struggled within him, and his
youth and his youthful desire for the joys of life took sides with his
father. In one moment he determined he would never see Andree again, and
then he would call himself an idiot and ask what harm could possibly
come from it.... If ever he had seen a “nice” girl, Andree was nice.
Well, then?... But he was disturbed, and had not been able to conquer
his disturbance when he entered the Union. There he found Bert Stanley
waiting for him.

“Here comes the wicked old man,” Bert saluted him. “What you been up to,
with me away? Have I got to keep my eye on you every minute?”

“Just walking around,” said Kendall. Some young men would have wanted to
tell about Andree and to discuss her, but not he.

“Let’s split a bottle of beer.... Say, I heard about an apartment to
let—up near the Étoile. What say to having a look at it to-morrow?”

“How much?”

“I heard it was three hundred francs—and we’re paying that much here for
one room with two beds.”

“Sounds good, but I don’t know. Anyhow, we can look it over.”

“’Tisn’t far from the office. We can walk over at noon.”

Kendall yawned. “Let’s go to bed,” he suggested.

“What’s the use? There’ll be an air raid to-night. Better to sit up than
just to get nicely asleep and have to roll out. I never get to sleep
again.”

Kendall persisted and walked up to his room, where he was soon in bed,
but not to sleep. He was excited and restless. He wanted to sleep, not
to think, but his mind persisted in its activity, and his thoughts
became incisive, whitely clear as one’s thoughts do of sleepless nights.
It was rather the sensation of being subjected to a blinding light which
hurt the brain.... It was not alone of Andree that he thought. He could
concentrate on nothing, but kept running down _cul-de-sacs_ of memories
and speculations and plans which overlapped and confused one another
maddeningly. He would shut his eyes and try to curtain off his mind so
that no thought could penetrate, but it was not to be done, so he tossed
and rolled and submitted.... Just around the corner of every avenue his
thoughts followed Andree, lay in wait. Before he knew it he was building
air-castles about her....

It was really a relief to him when the _alerte_ sounded. He said to
himself that he would not get up, and composed himself to wait. In a
quarter of an hour the barrage started, sporadically at first, then
worked itself up to a fury of sound such as he had never heard before.
It sounded nearer, more menacing. Really, cannon might have been going
off in the street below his window. So imminent did the sound become
that Kendall got out of bed, not frightened, exactly, but impressed. He
considered that there was nothing above his head but the roof. Half
determined to dress and go down, he fumbled for the light-button and
turned it before he remembered that there would be no light, that all
light was turned off at its source with the sounding of the _alerte_....
In his pajamas he went to the windows which opened out on the little
balcony which overlooked the Palais Royal, and stood there looking off
toward the east, where the firing was most furious.... Over his head he
could hear the angry humming of aeroplanes, and wondered uneasily if
they were defenders or hostile bombers. Tremendous detonations rattled
the windows and rocked the buildings, and these, he fancied, were
falling bombs. The sky was alight with up-leaping flares from the mouths
of the cannon and from shells bursting high above the city, searching
the heavens for flitting _Gothas_.... Then came a series of tremendous
upheavals which seemed to his tingling nerves to be almost at hand....
And then the sky was red with flames which uprose and spread and glanced
and billowed over the tops of the buildings. Metallic fragments rattled
on the roof of the Palais Royal, fifty feet away, and on the roof of his
hotel and in the streets below. Kendall ducked inside, for he knew this
was falling shrapnel from the defensive barrage.... For the first time
he was seeing a real air raid, a serious raid, and one that was meeting
with success. Already a tremendous fire had been started, and what might
not follow?... It was enough to shake one’s nerves, for the individual
is so helpless! All one can do at such a time is to hope and to argue
that Paris is large and a bomb small; that the chances of a bomb falling
where one happens to be are almost infinitesimal.

The sound came very near indeed. Kendall could not see what caused this,
but it was an anti-aircraft gun mounted on a truck which had come to a
stop at an open space at the mouth of the Avenue de l’Opéra and was
industriously blazing away at the moon.... Kendall wished he were
dressed and down-stairs with company at hand; he would even have
consented to descend into an _abri_, an experience which had not so far
been his. He wondered what an _abri_ looked like. At any rate, there
were plenty of them, for nearly every building in Paris was defaced by a
poster announcing, “_Abri, 30 places.... Abri, 60 places._”

The sound, the terrific crashings and retchings and tearing bursts of
tremendous potentiality, gradually ebbed, then surged up with renewed
vigor for a time, then subsided again, and, after a series of fitful
outbursts, ceased.... But the light which glowed and danced over the
roofs from the distant Faubourg St.-Antoine silhouetting the tangle of
chimney-pots on the Palais Royal did not subside. The fire burned on....

Kendall returned to bed—and slept.

If that raid had made Kendall Ware fearful, what had it done to the
teeming populations of the Faubourg St.-Antoine, to the closely packed
poor who massed about the Bastille, and to the eastward of this monument
to an event that owed its being to their own ancestors, to those who
used to dwell in St.-Antoine, mother of revolutions!

Next noon Bert Stanley and Kendall lunched at a table on the sidewalk of
a little café on the Place de Ternes and then walked down the Boulevard
de Courcelles a few hundred feet or so to the number that had been given
Bert as a place where a desirable furnished apartment was to let.

They entered through an archway and rang the bell of the _concierge’s_
apartment. A pleasant, motherly, smiling old woman came to the door and
bowed them in. It was not difficult to make her understand that they
were in search of an _appartement meublé_, whereupon she jangled a huge
bunch of keys and invited them to follow her up four flights of stairs,
and ushered them into the rooms that were for hire.... The apartment of
five rooms was to be had for three hundred francs a month, with twenty
francs extra for the _concierge_. Yes, a cook could be obtained, and
madame would undertake to have her on hand when needed. Her wages would
be seventy francs a month. Everything was very easy.

“Where is the bath?” asked Kendall.

“Oh, monsieur, we have a bath. Of a surety. It is but three blocks
away....”

So it was arranged. They were to move in when they desired, and they
left the building feeling quite like family men and proprietors. They
discussed the apartment from all angles and were exceedingly pleased
with themselves for accomplishing it....

“All France needs,” said Bert, quoting some epigrammatic American
friend, “is open plumbing to make it the greatest country in the world.”

On the broad stairs of that huge hotel which the United States
Expeditionary Force has taken over for its headquarters in Paris Bert
stopped suddenly.

“I can’t help you move in to-night,” he said. “But there isn’t much to
do. Get a taxi to take up our boxes and bedding-rolls. I’m going to be
busy.”

“So am I,” said Kendall, Andree recalled to his mind after she had been
absent from it since morning.

“Huh!” grunted Bert. “Same one you were with last night?”

“Go chase yourself,” said Kendall.

“If it is,” Bert continued, “we might make a mixed quartet of it. Dinner
and then _promenade avec_. Eh?”

Kendall hesitated. It sounded pleasant, but he was not sure Andree would
like it—and he was not sure about the sort of girl Bert might have
chosen for a companion. Andree, he had made up his mind, was not the
sort of girl who would take up with anybody.

“Nothing doing,” he said.

“Why?”

“Who’s your girl?” Kendall countered.

“Girl I’ve known quite awhile. Cashier in a shop.... Say, what you
getting at, anyhow? Madeleine’s a darn nice girl, I’m here to tell the
world. Looks it, too. I’d just as soon take her over to the Y. M. C. A.
and introduce her to the head guy—and she’d get past, too.”

“I don’t know.... I don’t know Andree very well. She might not like it.”

“Rats!” Bert said, scornfully. “They might as well get acquainted one
time as another.”

Kendall wasn’t so sure of that. He saw no reason why the girls should
ever get acquainted. In short, he didn’t follow Bert’s reasoning nor
comprehend the point he made.

“We can move in to-morrow,” Kendall said, and there was an end of it.

It was a long afternoon for Capt. Kendall Ware, but at last he found his
day’s work at an end and himself in the street. He went into a café for
a hurried meal and then took the Metro to the Place St.-Michel, arriving
there a good half-hour ahead of the appointed time. He took a seat at a
sidewalk table in a café from which he could watch the fountain, and
ordered a glass of coffee into which he squirted _saccharin_ from a
bottle with a nozzle like those used by American barbers to put bay rum
on one’s hair. At ten minutes past seven he was fearful Andree did not
mean to keep her appointment. At a quarter past he was sure of it....
And she was not due until half past. He was to learn that she was one of
those persons who are never ahead of time, who never hurry, but who may
always be depended upon to arrive eventually.

It was almost exactly seven-thirty when he saw her coming across the
Place. At first he did not recognize her, for he had been expecting that
white suit topped by its cunning tam-o-’shanter; but she was not in
white this evening. Her dress was of some light summer material and she
wore a dark tam. He never saw her wear anything but a tam.... She looked
more slender, younger, than before. Why, she seemed to be nothing but a
child! He knew she saw him, but she did not seem to see him, for she
came forward sedately, with those staid little steps of hers until she
was almost at arm’s-length. Then she looked up and smiled.

Again he found that difficulty in opening the conversation, in
organizing his French for action, and she—she seemed to have forgotten
her English. But each was glad to see the other. He tried to tell her he
was glad to see her, but made frightful work of his attempt to pronounce
the word _joyeux_. It necessitated resort to the dictionary—and
immediately awkwardness was dispelled.

“I have worked so—_so_—hard. All the day.”

“At what?”

She held out her book. It was a volume of Racine. “I have been
studying.” She opened it to show him. “Regard this so long part. It is
necessary for me to learn it. You do not know Racine.... You do not know
this play. Oh, it is very sad, very _tragique_. But it is very
beautiful....”

“What are you learning all that for?”

“I must.... I must learn many things. It is for the examination. I must
to enter into the _Académie_. First I must pass the examination. If I
can succeed to enter into the _Académie_, then I shall some day go onto
the stage of the Comédie Française and be a great actress and make much
money, and you shall sit and clap your hands. I shall then come to New
York like Madame Bernhardt, for there is much money, and you shall be
proud I am your friend. _N’est-ce pas?_ But it is very _difficile_ to
enter the _Académie_. One must know a famous actor or musician to
recommend one.... Do you know actors and musicians in Paris?”

“No.”

“You must to meet these actor, then, and know him well, so you will say
to him, ‘Recommend my friend to the _Académie_.’ It is very necessary.”
She looked up at him and smiled gaily at her little joke, which was
uttered half in seriousness.

“So you’re an actress, are you?” An actress! It rather startled him. He
had ideas about actresses—American actresses! But a French actress!...

“_Non.... Non.... Non...._ I am nothing. I am a young girl only, me. But
I must do something. I have to live, is it not? Yes.... Then to be the
actress in the Comédie Française is to be well.”

He was rather relieved. There is a difference between being an actress
and desiring to be one. He had an inspiration. “Maybe you would like to
go to the Comédie Française to-night,” he said.

She clapped her hands. “But yes—yes. Let us hurry. It is already late
and we shall miss something.”

They went to an adjacent bus-stand, where Andree tore two numbers from a
packet fastened to a post. The bus appeared, passengers alighted, and
the conductress began calling off numbers. Only those were allowed to
mount whose numbers were called, for overcrowding is not permitted. The
bus rolled away without them, but presently another appeared, their
numbers were called, and in ten minutes they were walking down the
Avenue de l’Opéra toward the theater.

Kendall bought seats, the most expensive in the house, and they entered,
mounting the broad stairway to the gallery, where they permitted
themselves to be shown into a species of box by an attendant. The play
was just commencing.

“Do you onderstan’ it?” Andree asked.

“Not enough to do any good.”

“Then I shall explain it to you.” And as the action progressed she
pattered on with explanations and observations very cunningly and
charmingly. “You see thees ol’ man? He is in love with thees yo’ng girl.
But she—she does not love him. It is ver’ sad. Thees yo’ng man who is
ver’ handsome, she loves him.” Suddenly she turned to him and asked:
“Are men in America—oh, how do you say—what is the word? _Fidèle._ Do
you know _fidèle_?”

“Faithful—constant—is that it?”

“Yes. Are American men so?”

“Why—generally, I guess.”

She shook her head somberly. “Frenchmen are not. They are most
_infidèle_. It is ver’ sad.”

“How about French girls?”

“Oh, some are _fidèle_ and some not. Some Frenchmen are _fidèle_. The
poor. _Oui._ It is the rich men and women who are not _fidèle_.”

“Are you rich?”

She laughed. “No, I am ver’ _fidèle_.”

“So the poor folks always marry and are faithful?” he asked, with real
curiosity.

“Oh, they are faithful. Not always do they marry. No. Sometimes they are
too poor, sometimes they do not want to, but they are _fidèle_. But yes.
Do young men and young girls in America always marry?”

“Yes.”

“It is very strange. Not so in France. No.”

“What then?”

“A young man love a young girl, and a young girl love a young man....
They marry, maybe. That is well. But maybe they do not marry. It is
expensive to marry. Then they see each other very often and he gives her
money so she can live.... That is well, because they are _fidèle_.”

Kendall gasped mentally. What would Detroit, what would his mother think
of such a theory of life as this? How would they regard a mode of living
which places fidelity over the solemn forms of marriage? Here was a
people who apparently valued love and fidelity more than marriage
licenses and wedding-rings!... It sounded very naughty to Kendall. Also
it made him think. His mother and his father tried to function in him
simultaneously and made a chaos of his thoughts....

The play continued. “Oh, you should onderstan’ French better. You must
speak it well, _well_!” she exclaimed. “Then I can read poems to you. Do
you know French poetry?”

He laughed. “I know one poem,” he said.

“Tell it to me.”

He recited:

                       “_Je vous aime,
                       Je vous adore,
                       Que voulez-vous encore?_”

She turned to look full in his face, her lovely, childish eyes alight
with mischief. “It is not a poem,” she said; “it is a declaration.”

“Exactly,” he said, half seriously.

“Oh no, no, no! You do not love me.... It ees not _possible_. No. You do
not know me enough yet.”

Without thought he made the leap. “Of course I do. How could I help
it?... Don’t you love me?” He talked to her as he would talk to a child.

“I do not know—yet. I have not known you. We shall see.”

She was perfectly serene and perfectly serious. It startled him. “By
Jove!” he said to himself, “things move rapidly in this country.” He was
right. France has a way of omitting unessentials and of disregarding
shams and subterfuges. If there is a destination to arrive at, France
does not walk around the block to reach it, but cuts straight across.

“You are sure you are not married?” she said. “You tell the truth?”

“I’m not, and I’m not going to be,” he said, decidedly. At least he
would put an end to any such speculations.

“_Pourquoi?_” There it was again, that direct, troublesome _why_.

“Because I don’t like it. I don’t want to be married.”

She nodded. Apparently the reason was perfectly good and sufficient to
her. She directed her attention to the play.

“Now,” she said, “thees ol’ man he has make love to thees yo’ng girl.
Also he has promise her much money, and she will love him.”

“I don’t like that,” he said. “I can see, maybe, why people should love
each other and all that, but the money part of it! I don’t like that at
all. That isn’t—good.”

“_Pourquoi?_ It is that a girl must live. She must eat. Because she
loves must she starve?”

There was practical France speaking, and France, in spite of
temperament, in spite of surface excitability and eccentricity, is
eminently practical—especially your France of the poorer sort. France
may jump, but she jumps with her eyes open, and with a pretty sure
knowledge of where she will fall.... The play moved on to its climax,
Andree translating, but little translation was necessary, for the
pantomime carried the story.

“It will be better for you to see a tragedy,” said Andree. “This is
_comédie_. The actors speak fast in _comédie_; in tragedy they speak
more slow.” She showed him how tragic actors speak, and it was
deliciously funny.

Then came the climax in which “thees ol’ man” took “thees yo’ng girl” to
the railway station and delivered her into the hands of her youthful
lover. Andree was in tears. The magnificent acting affected Kendall
himself, touched his emotions. He felt Andree’s hand move spontaneously
to touch his arm as though in sympathy with the bereaved and forsaken
old man, and Kendall took her little fingers in his palm and patted them
very much as he would have stroked the hand of a weeping child.... She
was so fragile, so childlike, so _nice_. He regarded her covertly,
wondering what was going on under that curly black hair ... assuring
himself that it was impossible for any one to think of anything but
sweetness in connection with her. Yet she was a mystery. He was
incapable of understanding her, and never came to understand her. A
mystery she always remained to him—but a sweet mystery, a dainty
mystery, a mystery never touched by unworthy things or thoughts.... And
that was another mystery which he might one day understand dimly. He
might come to a height from which his vision would be so clear that he
could understand that she was good with that natural goodness which
comes from God ... not with that conventional, rule-of-thumb goodness
which is a product of narrow beliefs and set dogmas. Kendall was good
himself, but he was not capable of attaining to a goodness such as
Andree’s, for he could never approach her naturalness, the instinct
which was in her for following always a path upon which God could smile,
even if men should frown.... Doubtless the frowns of men weigh but
little in the judgments of God....

They left the theater silently, the emotions evoked by the drama still
moving them and drawing them together. He felt a great tenderness for
her and almost fancied he was in love. It was a fair imitation. Whatever
it was, it was not bad, but good. He would not be the worse, but the
better, for having experienced it.

“My friend and I have rented an apartment,” he said, suddenly.

“Your friend? What is his name?”

“Bert Stanley.”

“You will live together?”

“Yes.”

“I will know him then.... You shall show him to me.”

“If you like.”

“Where is thees apartment?”

He told her.

“Is it very _grand_?” She used the word in the French, not the English
signification.

“Two bedrooms, dining-room, _salon_. It is very comfortable. We shall
move in to-morrow—and we’re going to have a cook.”

“Cook? What is cook?”

Again recourse must be had to the dictionary, and there followed a
lesson in pronouncing the rather difficult word _cuisinière_.

“Has thees friend, this Monsieur Stanley, a friend—like me?”

“I think so.”

“You do not know? You have not seen her?”

“No.”

“That is droll.... And thees cook?”

“I haven’t seen her.”

“I must come to see thees apartment and thees cook. I must know how much
you pay, and if it is too much.... Ah, you shall have a dinner and she
shall cook, and I shall be there, and your friend, thees Monsieur
Stanley, and _his_ friend. We shall know each other.”

“I don’t know,” he said, doubtfully, thinking of the proprieties and
wondering what the _concierge_ would say if he were to give a dinner
such as she suggested. His acquaintance with _concierges_ was limited.

Again they were walking up the dark Boulevard St.-Michel, and again she
would not permit him to accompany her to her door. “Good night.... It
was ver’ nice, and I think you are ver’ nice—perhaps.”

“But you don’t love me?” he asked, trifling with destiny without
intention, as young men will trifle.

“I do not know—yet.... I do not know you. And you do not love me. Oh no,
no! It is not possible. You make fun of me. I can see you make _grimace_
even in the dark.”

“When do we play together again?”

“Soon.... I cannot see you to-morrow, but the day after—yes.... It is
not a good place to meet, the Place St.-Michel. It is far. No, it shall
be the Metro, Place de la Concorde, at _sept heures_.”

“Seven o’clock.”

“Yes.... And you will not fail?”

“No.”

“Good night.”

He was of a mind to kiss her good night as he had kissed American girls
whom he had taken home from parties and with whom he had played about,
but he hesitated. He didn’t want to spoil things, to make her take
fright and disappear. She was becoming too much a delightful element in
his life for him to take a chance of losing her now.... And while he
hesitated she was gone.

As mysteriously as she appeared out of the mazes of the enormous city
she disappeared into them again, and Bert was apprehensive lest she fail
to reappear. He need not have been apprehensive. There is in life a
thread of fate, of destiny, which attaches one person to another, so
that, even though they separate to the ends of the earth, they will be
drawn together again at some spot in some hour.... Destiny had woven a
strand between Andree and Kendall....




                               CHAPTER V


Kendall Ware and Bert Stanley went early to _petit déjeuner_ in the
dining-room of the Union, for they had decided to move before the day’s
work began. The waitress laid her order-slips on the table, and as she
did so Kendall noticed that her eyes were red and swollen with weeping
and that it was with difficulty that she restrained her sobs.

“Mademoiselle is sad this morning,” he said, sympathetically.

“_Oui, monsieur_, very sad.... Oh, it is my brother! The word came in
the night. The _boches_ have killed him....”

“Poor kid!” said Kendall. It was his first direct contact with the
sadness of war, and it affected him strongly. Evidences of this sort had
been all about him, but this was so close!

“He was the last,” she said, finding comfort in his sympathy. “There
were three brothers ...”

“It’s rotten,” Kendall said when she moved away. “Rotten. These poor
women!...”

Bert made no reply. He was not the sort to voice sympathy if he felt it,
nor was he the sort to be moved as Kendall was moved. He was more
objective, less emotional—a trifle boisterous and swanking and not given
to peering below the surface of events. It was his motto to take what
came and make the best of it. On the whole, he was a careless, buoyant,
thoughtless young American whose two great objects in life were to get
on in the world and to have a good time. He had none of the scruples and
inhibitions that made Kendall Ware more complex—not that he was
unscrupulous; not that he was not an ordinarily square, able, decent
sort of boy, but there did not reside in him that meticulous ethical
sense that Kendall had inherited from his mother, and which had been
softened and made finer by inheritances from his father.

“Four sons out of one family,” said Kendall, “and there are thousands of
such cases, I suppose.” He stopped. “And every man killed is not a loss
to his mother and sisters alone—but to the girl he was going to marry or
had just married. After this war, Bert, where in thunder are the girls
of France going to find enough husbands to go around?”

“They aren’t,” Bert said, and then he grinned. “That’s why the American
Army is so popular with them. Every one of us is a possible husband, so
look out, young fellow.”

“A million—maybe two million—girls with nobody to marry.... It’s hell!”

“It’s up to us to do our best to keep them from worrying about it,” said
Bert, characteristically. “Come on, we’ve got to hustle.”

They loaded down a taxicab with their trunks and rolls and were driven
to their new home. The _concierge_, naïvely proud of having two American
officers as her tenants, bustled about them in genuine, motherly
welcome. Kendall liked the brightness of her smile, it was so brisk, so
alert; he liked her looks as a whole.... Why, she might have been his
aunt, he thought. She had the look of an aunt, the sort a nephew would
delight to visit.

“I have your _cuisinière_,” she said. “I recommend her. She will please
messieurs.... But she is large, _une bonne femme_. She comes to-morrow
and she is called Arlette. All things may be left to her, do you
understand? Yes, yes, Arlette will see to all, to the marketing and the
accounts—if _messieurs les officiers_ desire. Shall you dine at home
to-morrow evening?”

Bert looked at Kendall.

“I had an engagement with Madeleine. Don’t see why we shouldn’t dine
here, though.”

“Why,” Kendall said, hesitatingly, “Andree said she wanted to meet you
and Madeleine—and to see the apartment. We might—” He was still
reluctant.

But Bert settled the thing for him out of hand. “Dinner for four, if you
please. At seventy-thirty.”

“A nice dinner,” Kendall added, rather apprehensively. “There will be
ladies.”

He watched the _concierge’s_ face to see how this news would affect her.
Apparently it did not affect her at all.

“Of a surety,” she said, “Arlette shall be notified.”

The young men disposed of their traps temporarily and walked to their
offices.

“I heard of a bully place to eat,” said Bert. He was always finding new
and excellent and quaint cafés. “Up on the rue de Richelieu. Marty’s
they call it. A French officer told me about it—says it’s mostly
patronized by actors from the Comédie and artists and newspaper men.
Suppose we take a look.”

“Suits me,” said Kendall. “Meet you in the Union at seven.”

Kendall was more anxious to see Marty’s than he would have admitted to
Bert; as soon as Bert mentioned the fact that its _habitués_ were actors
he wanted to go to the place very badly. He wanted to see what French
actors were like—and actresses. In his whole life he had never seen an
actor off the stage, had never been especially curious about them, but
now it was different. Andree was going to be an actress if she could,
and he wanted to see for himself what sort of creature she would be when
she came to be one.

Since he left Andree the night before he had been filled with
uneasiness. Again and again he reviewed his conversation with her and
found it disturbing. He had rather lost his head, he perceived. He had
told her he loved her when, so he declared to himself, he did not love
her in the least, and the fact that she had made light of his
declaration and had refused to believe in the possibility of a so-sudden
affection helped the situation very little. What troubled him most was
that he had made a start of some kind, to travel some sort of path. He
didn’t know what sort of path it was nor whither it led, but he was
vaguely apprehensive of it. He fancied that half-meant declaration of
his had altered the status of himself and Andree altogether, and placed
them on a different basis. But he was wrong.... He remembered that he
wanted to kiss her, but was not inclined to take himself to task for
that. What could be more natural than to want to kiss Andree? He never
saw anybody who was more kissable.... Again and again he consoled
himself by conjuring up her face and studying it, and by remembering her
modesty, her reserve, her sweetness and goodness. Of course it was all
right. There wasn’t the slightest danger with a girl like Andree—if, of
course, they didn’t actually fall in love with each other. He didn’t
want to do that. Andree was a _foreigner_. She was not American, but of
another race, speaking another language. This may sound droll, but how
many Americans are there who would have felt exactly as Kendall felt!

Therefore the idea of marriage did not occur to him as of the
possibilities. He could not imagine himself marrying a foreigner. Here
his mother functioned without hindrance. She had been against all
foreigners. To her a foreigner had been a sort of freak of nature, a
distressing accident. Anybody who was not English had been guilty of
some sort of obscure offense against nature. Of course there were
degrees of foreignness—some, as the Chinese, were more guilty than
others—but it was a difference in degree and that was all. This was a
basic _fact_ to her, a part of her, and, without consciously instructing
Kendall, she had impressed her way of thinking upon him until it was his
own. He did not think of marriage with Andree any more than he would
have thought of eating a rose....

As a matter of fact, he didn’t know just what he did think of in
connection with her. He had no definite hopes. She had occurred in his
life and now he was drifting along, letting matters take care of
themselves. He simply was without intentions of any sort.... But he was
vaguely uneasy.

At seven-thirty Kendall and Bert entered Marty’s a bit diffidently, as
young men do who go to a place where they are uncertain of just how to
behave. It was a dingy little café, poorly lighted and rather crowded
with things. One passed a sort of bar upon which were piled _langoustes_
and melons, and behind which was madame, very fat and capable,
surrounded by bottles of various kinds, and keeping an efficient eye on
her patrons and upon the finances of the institution. A half-partition
of glass separated the bar from the rest of the room, which was filled
with tables in parallel rows, with a narrow aisle down the middle. When
filled to capacity the café might contain as many as thirty persons.

Madame bade them welcome with a smile and a _bon soir_, and motioned
them to proceed to a table. They seated themselves and looked about.
Only a few persons were present, but before a stout waitress dressed in
black had taken their order a considerable party entered and took seats
directly opposite. There were four men and two women. Almost
simultaneously a fifth young man entered noisily. He waved his cane in
the air as he hobbled in, for he had an artificial leg, and shouted
greetings to everybody. He was rather tall and very thin and pale, but
exceedingly jaunty. His felt hat, a disreputable affair, was askew on
his head, and there was something rakish about even his limp. With many
gestures and apparent great excitement he rushed from one table to the
other, shaking hands with everybody, and once in a while stooping to
kiss a girl on the cheek. Everybody laughed with him and at him. At last
his eyes perceived Kendall and Bert and he came lunging across to them.

“Ha!” he shouted, throatily. “Americans! Welcome! I shall sit at your
table and we shall be acquainted, is it not? You see I spik Engleesh
ver’ fine. Behol’! I shall sit here.”

“Have nothing to do with him,” a handsome young man called to Kendall in
French. “He thinks you have sugar.” And everybody laughed.

The young man leaped to his feet, waved his arms above his head, and
glared at his accuser. “_Bah!_” he shouted, explosively. “You are
nothing ...” and sat down very suddenly, apparently forgetting the whole
incident, for he leaned over the table to Kendall and said: “It is an
argument—yes. You shall decide, is it not? A foolish argument. Behol’—if
there is a king in Siam—eh, you observe?—and he is rich, oh, ver’, ver’
rich. You onderstand? Yes? Also, if there is a—what you call—a electric
button here”—he turned wildly and shoved his thumb against the partition
as if he were ringing an electric bell—“if I could press this button—do
you understand?—and thees king in Siam is dead—oh, queek, sudden, like
thees”—he caught a long thumb-nail against his upper teeth and snapped
it—“so.... Now, then, if I can so to push the button and thees king is
dead, and all his money is mine—the argument, messieurs, is—shall I do
it. _Voilà!..._” He leaned back and regarded them gravely.

“Give it a push,” said Bert.

“Ah, you theenk!...” He leaped again to his feet and extended his hand
across the table to Bert, who took it and shook hands rather
embarrassedly.

“I am Jacques,” said the young man. “We must to know one another. You
are named—ah, Monsieur Bert.... Monsieur Ken-dall. Ha!... All my friends
there, regard. Messieurs Bert and Ken-dall—my frien’s.... My
frien’s—Messieurs Bert and Ken-dall. Now we are acquaint’, is it not?
So.... You see that yo’ng man who spill soup on his coat. He is Monsieur
Robert, great comedian at the Comédie Française. _Oui_, he make the
first prize at the _Académie_ one year ago.... That other, with the hair
_so_.... He is _espagnol_.... _Oui_. Also an actor, but not a comedian.
He does _so_.” Jacques illustrated by scowling horribly in imitation of
the tragic method. “He also make the first prize at the _Académie_
before two year.... They are ver’ clever.” Both young men so described
got to their feet and came across to shake hands. “Those others,”
continued Jacques, in full voice, “are jus’ boys an’ girl. You
onderstand? Not anybody.... That one who look so jealous at hees girl—he
make the dress for ladies. _Oui._ He have much money, but no brains.” At
this _mot_ everybody shouted with laughter, and the girl who accompanied
the maker of dresses disentangled herself from him and came across to
sit down by Kendall, putting her cheek up to him.

“She wants you should kees,” said Jacques, and Kendall shamefacedly
planted a hurried kiss on her cheek. “And now you shall see—thees yo’ng
man with her, he is ver’ jealous. Perhaps he shall beat her w’en they
arrive at home.... _Oui...._”

Kendall proffered a cigarette to Jacques, and then extended his case
toward the young actors across the aisle. They were real American
cigarettes, one of which will do more to carry you into the good graces
of a _poilu_ than many bottles of _vin ordinaire_. Both young men came
across, not too eagerly, and helped themselves. Monsieur Robert, the
younger, and a very handsome, boyish, pleasing young man, seated himself
in the chair the dressmaker’s companion had just vacated. He understood
a word of English, but dared not venture an attempt to speak it;
however, he was exceedingly cordial in French. Kendall managed to
understand most that he said. It was a very laughable, but somewhat
_risqué_, account of a conversation he had essayed with an Englishwoman
during a recent engagement in London, carried on through the agency of a
dictionary. Purely through accident the young man’s finger had pointed
to a certain word when it should have been directed to quite
another—with the result that he received a sound box on the ear. He told
the thing with such boyish delight, and with such naïve joy in the
outraged prudery of the Englishwoman, that Kendall laughed as he had
laughed at nothing for months. This pleased the young actor. If Kendall
had been diplomatically angling for Monsieur Robert’s friendship, he
could not have contrived better.

Suddenly he remembered Andree. “You must know a famous actor,” she had
commanded him. Andree desired the good offices of an actor in her effort
to enter the _Académie_—and this young gentleman had carried off the
first prize in that national institution but a year before.... He
regarded Monsieur Robert with new interest.

While Kendall and Monsieur Robert made merry, if difficult,
conversational progress, Bert was instructing Jacques in colloquial
American in a manner to which his rather grotesque sense of humor was
peculiarly adapted. “If you meet a lady,” he was saying, “and she bids
you good afternoon, the thing to say, if you want to be really polite,
is, ‘Go jump in the lake.’ Of course you don’t say this to a lady the
first time you meet her, because it is rather friendly, but possibly the
second time. Do you understand?”

“But surely.... Go jump in the lake.... Ah, it has a sound, has it not?
I like that.” He stood up, placed his hand on his heart and bowed to
Bert profoundly. “Ah, madame,” he said, in honeyed tones, “you should go
to jump in the lake.... Is it so you say it? It is a phrase. I shall
remember it. And what does one say if—”

Kendall lost the next lesson, for Monsieur Robert arose and shook hands
warmly. “I hope you shall dine here often,” he said. “Me, I always dine
here.... So we shall become better acquainted.”

Others of the company took their departure to their theaters or with
their actor companions, or to write their criticisms, and as they went
out, laughing and jostling, each stopped at the table of the Americans
to shake hands and to say good evening. It was all very genial and
companionable—a sort of family affair—but very un-American and droll.

Kendall and Bert took their departure soon afterward. The evening was
rather hot, but they determined to walk home, a distance of a couple of
miles. As they were passing the Hôtel Wagram, Kendall glanced inside and
saw, standing just within the lobby, the Miss Knox who had been his
playmate on the voyage across the Atlantic.

“Wait a minute. Here’s a girl I know,” he said to Bert, and led his
companion inside.

“Well, Captain Ware!” she exclaimed. “I was wondering if I should ever
see you again. What have you been doing? Have you been to the front?”

“No. I’m anchored in Paris. And you?”

“I’ve been down at Tours, but now I’ve been ordered to report at
headquarters here. I don’t know where I shall be sent.”

“Better get assigned to Paris,” he said, rashly, “then we can play
around together.”

“I don’t know.... I’d rather be nearer things. It’s more interesting.”

“Anyhow, you’ll be here a day or two. Can’t you take dinner with me
to-morrow”——he stopped, hesitated, got a bit red, and finished,
lamely—“soon?”

“It looks as if I might have competition as a playmate,” she said,
dryly. “Is she nice? Who is she? Red Cross or Y. M. C. A.?”

“Neither.”

She laughed. “And your French is so miserable,” she said. “How do you
talk to her?”

“She speaks some English,” said Kendall, falling into a trap which had
not been set for him, and Bert and Maude Knox laughed as he reddened
with embarrassment.

“Is she pretty?” Miss Knox demanded of Bert.

“I don’t think so,” Bert said, solemnly. “He keeps her under cover. She
must be homely or he’d let her be seen.”

“Now I won’t buy you a dinner,” Kendall said.

“When I am so hungry!” she said, dolefully.

“Don’t blame Ken,” Bert said. “She hardly lets him have an evening to
himself.”

“Well,” said Miss Knox, “if you do get a night off I’ll be glad to see
you. Probably I won’t be here but a couple of days, though. You come,
too, Captain Stanley, if you like.”

“And pay for half of the dinner,” said Bert. “That’s fair. Half the
young lady, half the dinner-check. Simple justice.”

“Now I’ve got to run up to my room. I think—mind, I only think—I’m going
to have a bath. If the bathtub is still there, and if the water hasn’t
stopped running, and if a few other things haven’t happened to the
plumbing—Good night.... Don’t think of coming, Captain Ware, if it will
make any trouble with your friend.”

The two young officers walked on up the street. Kendall did not feel
like talking. He was thinking about Andree and comparing her with Maude
Knox. He was wondering what Andree would think of Maude, and what Maude
would think of Andree. Also he wondered a bit what Maude thought about
_him_ and what sort of an affair she believed him to be carrying on with
Andree.... Not that it mattered to him in the least what she thought,
but—

At last they stood before the building in which their apartment was
located. Bert pulled the bell and presently the lock clicked. They
pushed open the huge door and stepped into the blackness of the court,
lighting matches to find the light-button. It was a climb of four
flights of stairs to their rooms, which they entered with some pride of
possession and sat down to have a final smoke before going to bed.

“I wonder what the _concierge_ will say to our bringing the girls here
for dinner to-morrow night?” Kendall said, for the point still worried
him.

“Young man,” said Bert, drowsily, “you aren’t in Detroit. Go to the
window and reassure yourself. This is Paris....”




                               CHAPTER VI


Kendall was awakened next morning by the sound of some one shuffling
about his room. It was a woman, and she was moving toward the door with
his shoes in her hand, and for an instant he wondered if he were in the
presence of some new sort of burglar. The woman was short and very fat,
with a large head scantily covered by that colored hair which does not
turn white at sixty. Her face was broad, her nose was broad and had a
peculiar and laughable up-tilt, her mouth was broad, and her eyes were
very large and kindly. She had one generous double chin and a quite
respectable growth of whiskers. Her eyes and her nose were the most
notable features. One liked her eyes and one could not help laughing at
her nose. As a complete figure she was droll.

She saw that he was awake and grinned timidly.

“_Bon jour, monsieur_,” she said, and then, waggling his shoes, followed
her greeting by a torrent of French in which the word “_chaussers_”
occurred frequently. She spoke very rapidly and was unintelligible to
Kendall.

“Arlette?” he asked.

“_Oui, je suis Arlette_,” she said, with a broad grin of delight, and
then scudded through the door suddenly, as if she had been overtaken by
a fit of embarrassment.

Kendall got out of bed and called Bert, who was still asleep.

“Hey, somebody’s swiped my shoes!” came presently in a voice of
complaint.

“Shut up!” said Kendall, going into his friend’s room. “It’s Arlette. I
saw her sneaking out with mine when I woke up.”

“Arlette? ... Oh, _she’s_ here, eh? What’s she want with my shoes? I’ve
heard these French cooks could—”

But just then Arlette pushed the door open, regardless of the state of
her young employers’ toilets, and deposited the shoes on the floor,
carefully cleaned and polished.

The boys looked at each other, weighing this event in the light of their
experience with American domestics. It was so surprising as to be
upsetting.

“Seventy francs a month—including shines,” said Bert.

“And seventy francs is fourteen dollars.”

“And my mother pays her cook twelve a week—and hires another girl to
wait on the cook! ... Come to France to solve the domestic-servant
problem! ... I wonder if she bathes us.”

They hurried into their clothes and went to the dining-room, where a
great pitcher of chocolate stood in the center of the table, flanked by
a pot of jam and a basket of rolls. On each plate was a bowl—not a cup.
Arlette entered and stood with her stomach against the table’s edge,
whence she looked first at the food and then at her employers. She
pointed accusingly at the confiture and said, “_Abricot!_”

“Apricot, eh? _Très-bien._”

“_Mais non, messieurs.... Mais non._ It is not well.... Oh, the price—it
is terrific, it is wicked. Of a surety, you are robbed. We shall have no
more. _Messieurs les officiers_ shall not so be robbed. I shall see well
to it. But I was directed to procure confiture!” She crossed her pudgy
hands on her ample stomach and rolled her eyes to heaven, calling upon
Divinity to witness that apricot jam at four francs a jar was a thing to
excite horror in any well-regulated and economical mind.

Kendall strove to comfort her, but it was impossible. No quantity of
assurances that it was _très-bien_ could remove her mind from the
enormity of the cost of that delicacy, and she went out shaking her head
and muttering and sniffling a trifle. In a moment she re-entered to ask
what was desired for dinner. It was the first and the last time she made
such an inquiry. In the future she made suggestions herself, but never
did she ask outright what these strange young savages would have to eat.

“_Poulet_,” said Bert. “Chicken.”

Arlette rested her hands on her hips and stared at him aghast. She
repeated the word after him as if unwilling to believe such a thing had
been mentioned in her presence. “_Poulet? ... Poulet? ... Non, non,
non._ But no. It is too dear. The cost, consider the cost! Veal,
perhaps, but never pullet.”

“Young ladies are coming and we wish a suitable dinner,” said Bert.

“But pullet—oh no. There shall be a suitable dinner, but there shall not
be pullet. It is a thing unthinkable—at the price. Before the war—yes,
but now! _Mon Dieu!_ do the American officers consider what price is
demanded for pullet?”

The American officers did not, nor did Arlette enlighten them, but she
continued stubbornly to refuse to procure it.

Ken shrugged his shoulders. “It looks as if we were going to be
henpecked,” he said, ruefully.

Bert laughed. “Anyhow we get no chicken. I wonder if we can have a
salad?”

Yes, a salad was thinkable, and even string-beans or cauliflower or
peas—but pullet! Arlette’s mind refused to be diverted from pullet.

“Very well, then,” Bert said. “Whatever you want, Arlette. You’re the
boss. But get enough for four.”

Arlette turned around and made for the door again, but paused on the
threshold to turn and stare at them unbelievingly and to utter in a
voice of anguish the word, “_Poulet_.” She said it as one might say
bubonic plague.

As Kendall left the dining-room and went for his cap he saw a tiny,
big-eyed face suddenly whisk out of sight around the corner of the hall
which led to the kitchen. It had been the merest glimpse, such as a
believing mortal might hope some day to catch of a fairy.

“Hey, there!” he called in English, for he had a way with children and
children had a way with him. There was no response, so he gave chase.
The fairy had scudded into the kitchen, and was standing close to
Arlette, concealing herself in the old woman’s ample skirts. Arlette
gazed at him with some apprehension as he came into the little kitchen,
wondering, doubtless, what these barbarians would do to her for bringing
a child into their lair, but a sight of his face reassured her, and she
smiled a bit dubiously and placed her pudgy hand on the little girl’s
head.

Kendall got down on one knee and held out his hand gravely. “_Bon jour,
mademoiselle_,” he said.

“_Bon jour, monsieur_,” she said, with the cunningest little lisp, her
face very sober and a little frightened, and she shook hands with him
primly.

“How is your husband and all the family?” Ken asked.

Her eyes opened wide—blue and sweet they were—and she looked up at
Arlette before replying. “But, monsieur, I have not yet a husband.”

“No.... That is bad. You must find a husband. What, at your age? Oh _là,
là, là, là!_ And what is mademoiselle’s age?”

“Eight years, monsieur.”

He shook his head. “And no husband.... Would you like an American
husband, mademoiselle?”

“Oh yes, monsieur. The Americans they are very nice.”

She was the tiniest of mites with such a creamy-pink complexion as Ken
had never seen. Her face was oval and beautiful, with a fairy-like
childish beauty that deserved to be immortalized by some master of the
brush and canvas. He looked from her to Arlette and was unwilling to
admit a relationship between them or the possibility that this sprite
could ever grow with the weight of years and labor to resemble the old
woman. He wanted to kiss her; he wanted to kiss her on those little
lips, parted a trifle now in her interest, but usually resting so
lightly the one upon the other with the merest pursing which seemed to
say they were made for kisses. He drew her to him, and she came
diffidently, but not bashfully, and he lifted her to his knee. She
seemed almost to be without weight.

“How do you name yourself?” he asked.

“Arlette,” she said.

“My granddaughter,” Arlette explained. “Her father is a prisoner of war
in Germany—in consequence of which her mother is dead....”

“_Pauvre Mignonne_,” he said, and drew her close to him.

She looked up into his face briefly, and then, for the first time, she
smiled.

“You will come often to see me,” he said. “We must be friends—and then,
who knows, but I may have to take you to America with me. You have no
husband; I have no wife. I shall, perhaps, ask your grandmother for your
hand.”

“Yes, monsieur, I shall come often if monsieur permits.... And I shall
sing for monsieur.”

“I shall like that. And now let me see your hand. Something is the
matter with it.” He examined her palm gravely, then placed a franc upon
it and closed her fingers tightly. “There, that will cure it, I
think.... And you will not forget me—and you will think about going back
to America with me?”

“Yes, monsieur,” she said, very gravely.

Kendall rejoined Bert and they walked together to the Étoile and down
the Champs Élysées to the hotel which sheltered the huge office staff of
the American Expeditionary Force in Paris.

“I hope everything goes off right to-night,” said Kendall, who was still
a trifle dubious despite Andree’s expressed desire to meet Bert and his
friend.

“Sure. We’ll make it a regular party,” Bert said, confidently. “What’s
worrying you?”

“You never can tell how strange girls will get on together.”

“Fiddlesticks!... Madeleine will get on with anybody. See you at the
house at seven.”

Promptly at seven Kendall was awaiting Andree at the entrance to the
Metro in the Place de la Concorde, and promptly at the hour she
appeared, walking leisurely, as she always seemed to do, and with an air
of not seeing him at all until she was very close to him, an air which
he came to associate with their meetings. There was something diffident
about it, something modest and maidenly that he liked.... Then she would
pause, always hesitatingly, as if she rather doubted her welcome, and
look up into his face without the vestige of a smile, expecting him to
extend his hand, and then she would shake hands very gravely. It was
always so.

“You have made much work to-day?... You are _fatigué_?” she asked.

“But, no.... And you?”

“I have been—what do you say?—_ennuyée_?”

“Bored.”

“Yes, yes, bored.... Have you thought of me?”

He had intended to be most circumspect, to make no repetitions of his
half-joking declaration of their last meeting, but with her delightful
presence beside him, with that half-veiled, appealing glance from her
darkly shadowed eyes, good resolutions were forgotten.

“I’ve thought of nothing else,” he said, and was near to the truth.

“But no”—she shook her head childishly—“you have not thought of me at
all. It is not possible.”

“I thought of you when I got up, I thought of you all the morning, I
thought of you at noon and all the afternoon—and I am thinking of you
now.”

She laughed quietly. The drollery of his protestation pleased her and
made her gay. Thereafter it became a formula, a sort of ritual. She
would ask him if he had thought of her, and he would recite, “When I got
up, all the morning, at noon, all the afternoon,” and always she would
laugh as if it were very new and very funny and very delightful.

“Where do we go?” she said, as he took his place by her side.

“To dine with Arlette.”

“With Arlette!... Who is thees Arlette?”

“My cook,” he said.

“At your apartment?”

“Yes.”

“I do not know....”

“Bert and Madeleine are coming, too. You said you wanted to know them.”

“Yes.... Yes.... I will know them. And this yo’ng girl, this Madeleine,
does your friend love her?”

He spread his hands and shrugged his shoulders. “How should I know?”

“He has not told you?... He is your friend and he has not told you?”

“No.”

“Have you told him about me?”

“A little; not much.”

“_Pourquoi?_”

“Mademoiselle Pourquoi!... Oh, because you were none of his business.”

“Oh, I do not onderstan’, I do not onderstan’.” She clasped hands
together with mock despair, and with the cunningest expression of
bafflement on her face. “I do not onderstan’.... It ees ver’ difficult,
ver’ difficult.”

“Shall we take the Metro or a taxi?”

“The Metro, of a certainty. It arrives, does it not? And the taxi—oh, it
is very dear.”

“You’re a great little economist,” he said, laughingly, but nevertheless
wonderingly. American girls had never been so careful to choose the less
expensive of two methods.

As they were descending into the Metro they came suddenly face to face
with Maude Knox, and Kendall felt himself blushing hotly, and was
ashamed of himself for it, so he blushed even more hotly than before. He
stopped determinedly, and held Andree’s arm.

“Miss Knox,” he said, “I want you to meet Mademoiselle—” He hesitated,
for he did not know Andree’s family name. This piece of ignorance had
never presented itself to him before. She had been Andree to him, and
nothing more. She had needed no other name. “I want you to meet
Mademoiselle Andree,” he finished, rather defiantly.

The girls looked at each other, Miss Knox with a humorous twinkle in her
eye, but nevertheless with a glint of keen appraisal; Andree rather
timidly, as if she would like to hide behind Kendall as little Arlette
had hidden behind her grandmother’s skirts that morning, and peer out
big-eyed at this woman of another race.

Maude Knox extended her hand. “Delighted,” she said, and smiled.

“Mademoiselle is very agreeable,” said Andree, but she did not smile;
instead she studied Miss Knox’s face intently and very gravely.

“There’s our train,” said Kendall, at a loss how otherwise to proceed
with the conversation, and he snatched Andree away before another word
could be exchanged. Maude Knox stood looking after them with a smile
that had in it a hint of something that was not humor, that mingled
curiosity with pique.

Andree and Kendall alighted from the Metro at the Étoile and walked to
the apartment. He was rather taken aback to see the _concierge_ sweeping
the walk in front of the entrance, for he had hoped subconsciously to
smuggle Andree in without being seen. He could hardly have explained
this had he been asked. But he need not have been apprehensive. The
_concierge_ stopped, peered at Andree keenly for a second, then smiled
and bade them good day. Kendall did not know it, but Andree had been
inspected and had passed the inspection handsomely. Andree, however, was
well aware of it.

Bert and Madeleine had not arrived, and Kendall showed Andree into their
_salon_ with something of a flourish. She stood looking about her at the
massive gilt furniture, at the large bronze statue of Diana with a bent
arrow in her hand which stood on a pedestal in a corner, and at a bronze
monstrosity depicting Ceres which, half life size, overweighted the
mantel. Her little nose was curling.

“Oh,” she said in disappointment, “thees is not good. No, no. It is ver’
bad.”

“It is sort of fussy,” said Kendall, more than half afraid that she
would take fright at so much wretched taste on exhibition and refuse to
remain. She seemed of a mind to beat a retreat. “But don’t blame me for
it,” he hastened to say. “It isn’t my furniture, you know. This is a
furnished apartment—_meublé_, you know. I don’t like these gimcracks any
better than you do, but I couldn’t help it.”

She continued to shake her head dolefully; then her eyes spied a sort of
throne between the windows, a fearful example of what a piece of
furniture can be, and clapped her hands with childish delight. “Oh, it
ees for me. See!” She ran to it and seated herself on the threadbare
seat, her tiny feet dangling above the floor. “Behold!... Regard me!...
I am a queen, is it not? You have not the manners. It is that you should
kneel. Here ... at once.”

Laughingly he humored her whim and, dropping on one knee, he lifted her
hand to his lips. She laughed delightedly. Then she stepped down. “Come.
I shall see the rest. You shall show me.” And she insisted upon being
shown over the apartment, making little sounds of approval or
disapproval as she went, and finally they reached the kitchen where
Arlette was busy over the stove.

“_Bon soir, madame_,” said Andree.

“_Bon soir, mademoiselle_,” Arlette replied, and swiftly scrutinized
this young woman whom her master was bringing into his home. It was a
frank appraisal, for Arlette felt a sort of responsibility for these
strange, rather boisterous, difficult-to-understand, but kindly young
savages of whom she had taken charge. Then she smiled and released a
flood of French upon Andree, who smiled and chattered back at her.
Kendall caught only a word here and there, so rapidly did they speak,
but it was evident to him that they approved of each other, and there
was something very pleasing to him in that. He felt that Arlette would
not have approved of everybody.

Presently they returned to the _salon_ and Andree said, seriously: “She
is well. I am satisfied. She is of a trustworthiness. Yes....”

“I don’t know what I’d do if she hadn’t suited you,” said Kendall, with
a chuckle.

“Oh, I do not onderstan’.... I do not onderstan’. And why does your left
eye laugh when your right does not? It ees ver’ fonny.” She pointed.
“Oh, see! It is laugh! It is laugh!”

He wrinkled his nose at her, so bold and familiar had he become, and she
pretended anger.

“You make _grimace_ at me. It is not good. Why do you make _grimace?_”
Then her mood changed. “Thees American girl—she is your friend?”

“An acquaintance.”

“You love _her_. I know it.... You love her.”

“Nonsense!”

“You see her often—and you love her.”

“I didn’t know she was in Paris until last night, and I certainly don’t
love her.” She had withdrawn into herself and become a stranger to him.
It startled him, frightened him, not so much because she had withdrawn
herself from him, for he guessed that it was mostly pretense, but
because he had a glimpse of what it would mean to him if she should
withdraw herself utterly. “I don’t love anybody but you,” he said, and
he said it without wishing or intending to say it.

“No,” she said, decidedly. “It ees not possible. You mock me.”

Before he could enter upon protestations Bert opened the outer door and
handed a young woman into the apartment. Kendall could see that she was
tall and rather slight, but that was all. He was anxious for her to
appear, first out of curiosity, but principally to be reassured as to
Andree’s reception of the stranger.

In a moment Bert appeared in the door with the girl at his side, both
laughing as at some joke which had just been uttered.

“Hello, children!” Bert said, a trifle noisily. “Mademoiselle Andree, is
it not?” He advanced and took the hand which she held out to him primly
while she studied his face with a calm, inscrutable expression.
“Mademoiselle Andree, Monsieur Ken, this is Mademoiselle Madeleine.”

Both shook hands with the laughing girl, Andree still with that
restraint which was always hers at a first meeting, Kendall with relief,
for he liked Madeleine’s looks. She was taller than Andree by inches,
and not at all beautiful as Andree was beautiful. The key-note of her
character at first glance seemed to be joyousness, a lightness of heart,
good nature. Her mouth was rather broad, but not displeasingly so, for
it was always showing her white teeth through a smile that seemed to be
the commencement of a laugh. She was always laughing, always moving her
body or her hands as if the young life that was in her could not be
still.... And yet there was a shrewd look about her eyes which
advertised that here was no empty head, but a capable young person
indeed.... She was a distinct blonde, with hair which seemed always just
on the point of being disordered, yet which never seemed to lose control
of itself and become disordered. Later Kendall wondered if Madeleine and
her hair were not very much alike in character.

“All right, eh?” said Bert, proudly, patting Madeleine’s shoulder.

She threw him a laughing, affectionate glance, and in another instant
she and Andree were chattering to each other with a rapidity which was
not only astonishing, but utterly unintelligible to the boys. If Andree
spoke with bewildering rapidity, what could one say of Madeleine?
Kendall laughed.

“Mademoiselle Mitrailleuse,” he said, and it was a name that clung, for
it was so apt. She was a veritable machine-gun, shooting out words with
a rapidity almost incredible.

Arlette appeared in the door of the dining-room and announced that
dinner was served. The quartet of young people took their places at
table, and Kendall began serving a wonderful pea soup from a big bowl
while Arlette stood in the door with hands folded across her stomach,
watching anxiously and shooting quick glances at Madeleine.

“It is soup,” she said, suddenly, and then darted out of sight with
startling abruptness.

The soup was followed by meat, which Arlette placed on the table with
something like a flourish, then stepped back and addressed Andree.

“Veal,” she said. “Oh, mademoiselle, the meats are too dear. It is not
my fault.... Perhaps this will be tough. Who knows?” She paused
anxiously to look first at Bert and then at Ken, who was carving.

“It’s all right, Arlette,” he assured her, but she was not satisfied,
remaining as close to the table as she could press and watching with an
expression of the most comical anxiety while Ken cut off a morsel and
put it in his mouth. She then, apparently, calculated the difficulty he
encountered in mastication, her jaws working a trifle as if to aid in
the process, and presently uttered a deep sigh of relief. According to
her judgment, Ken had not chewed too laboriously and the meat was
satisfactory. Only then did she retreat to the kitchen.

“She is very droll,” said Madeleine, restraining her laughter with
difficulty.

“She is very _well_,” said Andree, nodding her head prettily, “but also
she is droll.”

“Monsieur Bert also is droll,” said Madeleine, reaching out to bestow a
little pat upon Bert’s hand.

“All Americans are droll,” said Andree, solemnly.

“_Tous les Américains sont fous_,” said Ken, quoting a saying of Paris,
which adored Americans at the moment and delighted in their
peculiarities and their absurdities, and laughed at them as one laughs
at the antics of children, deciding, as its dictum had it, that all the
Americans were mad.

The _viande_ was served alone, as is the French custom, without a
vegetable, but with a delicious sauce which the girls, disdaining
butter, sopped from their plates with their bread—not at all a
manifestation of ill-breeding, but the proper and natural and habitual
method of eating.

Ken turned to Andree. “I met your actor for you last night,” he said.

“You have known an actor?... What actor?”

“Monsieur Robert, of the Comédie Française. Do you know him?”

“I have seen him. He is a very good actor—and very handsome, _n’est-ce
pas_? Have you spoke of me?”

“No, my dear. Give a fellow time.”

“But you must, you must.... It is ver’ _nécessaire_—oh, you do not know
how ver’ _nécessaire_. It is my need to enter into the _Académie_, and
he must help me. You will know him better.” It was a command. “You will
then make me to know him.”

“I should say _not_.... He’s too handsome. I’m not going to take any
such chance as that—I should say _not_.”

“_Pourquoi?_”

“Because I should be jealous,” he said.

“_Non, non, non!_... You do not care. You only _say_....”

“How am I going to convince you?”

“I do not know. It is not possible.... I will not believe.”

Ken turned despairingly to Madeleine. “She refuses to believe that I
love her. How shall I make her believe?”

Madeleine laughed at him. “How should I know?... It is for you to do. It
is a thing easy of accomplishment.”

“Is it easy to make her love me, too?”

“French girls are not cold,” she said, in the most matter-of-fact way
imaginable.

“He loves an American girl.... I have seen her this night—yes. She is
not beautiful. American girls do not know how to dress.” Andree shook
her head and frowned at Ken.

Arlette appeared presently with the vegetable, which she named and
waited to see approved, and afterward with the salad and a like
procedure. When the fruit appeared she made no observation, but asked,
calmly, as if it were the most natural question in the world, “_Petit
déjeuner_ for four?”

Breakfast for four! It was dropping a thunderbolt on Kendall’s plate. He
was shocked. He was frightened, and shot a quick glance at Andree and
Madeleine. Andree was sipping her wine and appeared not to have heard;
if she had heard she was not disturbed nor shocked nor angered.
Madeleine was laughing.

“_Arlette est très-méchante_—Arlette is very naughty,” she said.

Bert shouted with laughter as at some superlative witticism, and both
the girls looked at him rather surprised. Then Madeleine laughed a bit,
as one laughs who does not quite see the point. Kendall watched Andree
in consternation. What would she do? What would she say? What would she
think?... She did nothing, said nothing, apparently thought nothing, but
pared a banana with quaint intensity as if a banana were a strange and
interesting fruit. She seemed always to be interested in her food with a
sort of naïve curiosity and a very real appetite. Her appetite seemed to
Kendall to be the only material thing about her. The rest was mystery,
dainty, rather elfin, mystery.... And here was a new mystery—her
attitude of unconcern in face of Arlette’s _faux pas_. Why, the question
had not touched her at all! It might as well not have been asked.... Or,
in this strange country, was it possible that the _cuisinière_ always
expected her master’s feminine guests to remain for breakfast as well as
dinner? He wondered....

“Will they take Paris—the _boches_?” Andree asked, suddenly.

The Germans had broken across the Chemin des Dames and were rushing
headlong toward the Marne. News was filtering through only in driblets.
Paris was uneasy. One saw nondescript vehicles, piled with trunks and
hampers, making haste for the railroad stations, as frightened
inhabitants betook themselves to the country. Nobody knew what would
happen, but for months the fortune had been bad—and Paris was asking if
it had reached its worst.

“Of course not,” said Bert, dogmatically.

“But they are very strong—they have great numbers.”

“There are the Americans,” said Madeleine.

“To be sure—the Americans. But they are in Lorraine. The journals say
they are in Lorraine.”

“You will see,” said Madeleine, for she had more than her share of
Paris’s enthusiasm for its newest ally.

“Don’t you worry. The _boches_ are going to get themselves thrashed....
Paris!...” Bert shrugged his shoulders disdainfully.

“You really think they can be beaten?”

“Just wait.”

“And the war will end?... When will it end?”

“In a year.” Bert was very confident.

“Oh, a year—so long.... Monsieur Bert, it is terrible, this war. One
hardly remembers when it was not. We are so tired of it. The women are
so tired of it.... It makes me sad—sad. Everybody suffers.” Andree’s
eyes grew bigger and blacker, and her wistful mouth became more wistful.

“It is true,” said Madeleine. “I have an aunt who lives in the
country—in a very little village. Before the war were thirty families
and fifty men. I was there two years ago. The men were all at the
front—all.... But the fields were planted and the harvests reaped. It
was the women. They labored for the men.... I was there again—it was a
month ago.... The fields were not planted. Matters were bad. It was not
beautiful, and all was neglected.... The women no longer worked. And
why? Ah, it was because there was no longer a reason for them to
work.... There were no men to come home to those fields.... Of the fifty
who went to the war, fifty were dead.... Forever it will be a village
without men!...”

There was a silence. Every one was feeling the weight of the calamities
of war.... Then Madeleine laughed, but it was a laugh without her
customary gay, careless ring. “This is the last generation of the
French,” she said, half mockingly. “Our men are gone.... You shall see.
The next generation will be what? Look you. It will be English, Belgian,
Italian, American, Moroccan, Chinese....”

“For example!” exclaimed Andree.

“It is so,” affirmed Madeleine.

“Already the government offers one five hundred francs for a son.... I
think the government is satisfied if it is half French, is it not?”

“A son is a son,” said Andree.

“To become a soldier when he is a man—and fight the _boches_!”

“There will be no more wars,” said Bert. “When we are through with this
one nobody will ever have to fight the _boches_ again.”

“If one could believe,” Andree said, in a low voice.

Kendall was disturbed. It was within his power to be sympathetic, to
feel deeply, to know pain because another was suffering pain. He wished
this subject had not arisen and he wanted to have it changed ... because
the plight of the women—especially the young women, the marriageable
girls of France—was making itself apparent to him. Millions of them, and
no men to marry them! It was appalling. It was appalling that they
should realize it, and the consequences of their realization were
appalling.... Life was denied them; the fullness and beauty and the joys
and sufferings of womanhood were denied them. He wondered, with his
Middle-Western conscience, if one could really blame them for snatching
what little minutes of living came in their way. He wondered if the
conventional—in these terrible circumstances—could be the _right_. Would
the morals of Plymouth Rock answer in this emergency?... And then came
the inevitable question, What are morals?... His mother could not answer
this question for him to his satisfaction, nor could his father—with all
his father’s leniency. One had to see the thing to comprehend it, and
neither of his parents had seen. For the first time he asked himself if
the conventions, the cut-and-dried rules of living under which he had
grown to manhood, really sprang, full-armed, from the will of Deity, or
if they were evolved by expediency.... It was deep speculation for one
of his equipment, and dangerous speculation for a young man set down as
he was set down among manners strange and customs so divergent—and in
such an emergency.

He moved back his chair. “Let’s go in the other room,” he said, “and—and
suppose we talk about something besides the war.”

“It makes you sad?” Andree said, and looked at him with a strange
expression of sympathy, of understanding—of—of something that made her
seem nearer to him, less mysterious, more human than she had ever seemed
before. “Come ... we shall talk awhile and then I must go to my house,
because it is ver’ _nécessaire_ for me to lift up at an early hour.”

Kendall laughed. “Lift up?...” The literal translation uttered so
soberly was exquisitely funny, made more so by Andree’s solemn little
face.

“It is fonnee? For example! And what should one say?”

“Get up,” said Ken.

“It is not well.... I shall say lift up.”

“You may say whatever you want to—_mignonne_,” he said, with a sudden
access of tenderness.

“_Mignonne!..._” She looked up at him and smiled timidly. “It is ver’
pretty—for you to call me so. It is ver’ well.”

Madeleine was singing now. She always sang, Kendall discovered, mostly
popular _chansons_. And Andree joined. It was that song dear to the
_poilu_—“_Madelon_”—with its catchy air, its characteristic Frenchness.
Madeleine sang gaily, carelessly, Andree seriously and without a
smile.... Then the girls chattered with each other, becoming acquainted,
while the young men smoked and tried to edge into the conversation, or
to catch a stray word here and there. At last Andree rose.

“You must take me to my house.” she said.

“So early?”

“It is ver’ _nécessaire_.”

“Coming?” Ken said to Bert, who cast a sidewise glance at Madeleine, and
said: “No. We don’t go your way, anyhow.... See you later.”

So Kendall and Andree said good night and went down the stairs, counting
the flights gaily, he offering to become an elevator to carry her down
if she became tired, and she demanding that he do so at once, without
delay. “Your friend, he is a high yo’ng man,” she said, suddenly.

And that became a joke between them. Ever after that they referred to
Bert, not by name, but as the “high yo’ng man.” When people begin to
have private jokes between just themselves they are getting on very well
indeed....

Once more he took her to the Place St.-Michel and a little way up the
Boulevard. There she dismissed him, but they lingered with their good
nights. She seemed very gentle, very desirable, very sweet.... He was
not afraid of her as he had been before. Some sort of message had
traveled between them.... Kendall took the hand she extended, then he
drew her to him and kissed her. She submitted, but did not return his
kiss.

“When?” he asked.

“The day following to-morrow. Place de la Concorde. Metro. _Sept
heures._”

It was becoming a part of their ritual. And then she disappeared into
the darkness—whither, he did not know; back into that mystery which was
her life, from which she emerged from time to time as mysteriously as
she disappeared.... He was impressed by this mystery tonight. He did not
know her name—only Andree. She was a sort of apparition that manifested
itself daintily, primly, conducted itself bewitchingly, and withdrew
itself into the unknown....

He took the Metro back to the Étoile and walked home. The light was
burning in the hall. When he hung his hat on the hall tree he found it
still encumbered by Madeleine’s hat and jacket....

Kendall went to bed in a frame of mind.... Madeleine had seemed such a
_nice_ girl. She _was_ a nice girl. Why, Andree had liked her.... His
mother in him was shocked, affronted. Yet, somehow, Kendall was not so
shocked as he expected himself to be. He didn’t know how he felt ... his
thoughts were a turmoil, and he kept repeating to himself, “She _is_ a
nice girl ... she is a nice girl,...” as one who is bewildered in the
presence of some incomprehensible phenomenon....




                              CHAPTER VII


Kendall dressed and went in to breakfast feeling no slight awkwardness.
He was apprehensive, too, apprehensive of the _concierge_. The affair
had upset him in a complex sort of way. It had startled him, yet it had
not shocked him especially, and he was inclined to take himself to task
for not being shocked. He was disappointed, and yet he was not
disappointed in Madeleine. Anyhow, he was reluctant to meet her, for
fear that the meeting would set him against her irrevocably and so cause
trouble between himself and Bert.... And yet he was enjoying the
experience as an experience, though he did not quite appreciate that he
was enjoying it. Half a dozen times he said to himself, as if carrying
on a subconscious argument: “But she’s a _nice_ girl.... Darn it all,
she’s a nice girl....” He was afraid a meeting with her would dispel
this impression of her niceness.

Bert and Madeleine were already at table, waiting for him. Bert said
good morning nonchalantly, and Madeleine smiled brightly and wished him
“_bon jour_” without the least hint of embarrassment or
self-consciousness. He was conscious of a feeling of relief. “By Jove!
she is a nice girl,” he said to himself, and took the hand which she
arose and offered.

Then Arlette came in with the pitcher of chocolate, and Kendall
scrutinized her and then shook his head rather bewildered. Arlette might
have been serving breakfast to the most circumspect of families. The
only thing one could say of Arlette was that she served breakfast. She
was normal, everything was normal. Kendall’s bewilderment increased.

“Mademoiselle Andree? Where is she?” Madeleine asked, presently.

“At home,” said Kendall.

“Ah....” Madeleine’s eyes twinkled.

“Now listen here,” Kendall said, “Andree and I are friends, just
friends. We—how do you say it?—_camarades_. That is all.”

“And you do not love thees Mademoiselle Andree? Not at all?”

“I—” Kendall hesitated and did not answer, and Madeleine’s eyes twinkled
as she went on with her cross-examination.

“And thees Mademoiselle Andree—she do not love you?”

“I tell you we are just friends....”

“For example!... I understand. You are just friends. Oh yes. It is
possible, because the French girl she is so col’.”

Kendall applied himself to his chocolate and confiture industriously,
while Madeleine looked at him with twinkling eyes. If he failed to
understand her or her system of life and philosophy, she was equally
unable to understand him. If he found the present situation bewildering,
she, for her part, regarded him as a strange phenomenon that bordered on
the impossible. As a final conclusion she did not believe him in the
least, but thought of him as absurdly discreet. No other solution was
possible to her.

They finished breakfast and went down the four flights of stairs, Bert
and Madeleine chatting gaily, Kendall following apprehensively, for they
must pass the omniscient eye of the _concierge_. He was inclined to make
an excuse to go back to the apartment so that he would not be compelled
to take part in the scene he feared.

Bert and Madeleine passed out of the big doors into the concrete-floored
passageway that led to the street, and Kendall drew himself together as
he saw the _concierge_ busily sweeping between them and the outer doors.
She looked up and nodded and smiled. Madeleine stopped and they chatted!
Actually chatted as if—why, as if there was no reason why they should
not chat. And that _concierge_ was a gray-haired, motherly soul who in
Detroit would have gone to foreign missionary meetings! Kendall could
not follow the conversation, but he caught fragments of it. It was just
casual chatter, with here and there a question dropped in to make for a
better acquaintance. Then they bade each other good-by in the most
friendly way imaginable and the trio went out to the street.

Kendall was suspended in mid-air, feet off the ground, nothing solid
within reach. He was in an element that was not his, in a universe where
two solids could occupy the same place at the same time, or where the
shortest distance between two points was a curve. All his rules and
axioms were useless.... He began to realize that the years he had lived
were more or less useless to him, and that if he wished to judge his
present life and the people among whom he lived he must start at the
beginning with an open mind. As an American he could never comprehend
them; he could not think their thoughts nor understand their mental
language. The part of him inherited from his mother could never get into
_rapport_ with France; the part inherited from his father never could
quite comprehend, though it might tolerate with a kindly toleration, and
say: “Well, I don’t understand this way of doing things at all.... But
maybe it’s all right—for the French.”

He kept glancing at Madeleine. Every glance reassured him. She was a
_nice_ girl. He liked her. There was nothing reprehensible about her,
but, on the contrary, she was charming as he liked to see a girl
charming, and modest, and _good_. He felt instinctively that she was
good, just as he had felt that Andree was good.... Somewhere there must
be an explanation. Somehow the thing was reconcilable.

They left Madeleine at the Metro and walked to their offices. Neither
boy referred to the situation; Bert, because he saw no reason for it;
Kendall, because he dared not. Strangely, it was not Madeleine and Bert
that troubled him; it was himself. He was not accustomed to studying
himself, but he was doing so now. He had rather fancied himself a man
capable of thought and understanding, a man who could look at the world
and comprehend it. He had regarded himself as wise in his generation,
not blatantly so, but with a certainty born of inherited dogmas and
local dogmas. For the first time he saw dimly that one may understand
the world from the Detroit point of view and be utterly at a loss in New
York; that he may understand life from the American point of view and be
grossly ignorant of the French. He even asked himself this question:

“Is one who lives up to his code of ethics, his moral conceptions, good
and moral, even if those ethics and conceptions are utterly at variance
with some other code of behavior?”

Could it be that a thing abominable in America because America’s code
was set against it could be perfectly proper in Persia because Persia’s
code permitted it? That there was an abstract _good_ he believed, and
that there was an abstract _evil_. But could a definite act be made
universally evil by legislation or by the custom of only a part of the
world? It was deeper reasoning than he had ever essayed before, and he
limped sadly as he traveled toward no conclusion at all. The result was
multiplied bewilderment....

One conclusion he reached: If Madeleine had been an American girl he
would have been shocked, outraged.... This led him to think of Maude
Knox, and suddenly he wanted to see her, to talk to her, to be with her
because she was American as he was American. He wanted to get his feet
on solid earth and to tread accustomed paths for a while. He determined
he would see her.

At noon he told Bert he would not be at home for dinner, and then at six
o’clock he hurried to the Hôtel Wagram and telephoned Miss Knox’s room.
She was in, and would be delighted to dine with him if he would wait
twenty minutes. He sat down in the spacious lobby and smoked and waited.

She came down the stairs very trim and American and pleasing to the eye.
He noted the little swagger—the rather charming swagger—to her walk. It
was accentuated by the fact that she carried her hands in the side
pockets of her coat. She was not in uniform; had left it off for the
evening as the women in the various services love to do. He arose and
walked to the stairway to meet her, and they shook hands in the frank
American way.

“Well?” she said, with a humorous twinkle in her eye.

“I got to wanting to see you this morning,” he said, “and it grew. So I
just came along and took a chance.”

“To-morrow would be too late. I’ve got a job with a combat division and
I’m going out to-morrow. Maybe I’ll get close to the front.”

“Congratulations. You’re luckier than I.... We’ll make this a
celebration. Where would you like to eat?”

“Any place.... I don’t care—somewhere where we won’t see an American....
Have you seen the papers?”

“No. I’ve been grubbing all day, but a hint of the news has dribbled in
to me.”

“Then you’ve heard that the Hun is stopped! And that we did it. Isn’t
that glorious? We—Americans—saved Paris. I wonder if it can be true.”

They bought a _Herald_ from a kiosk and found a brief, unsatisfactory,
much-censored story, but it was a confirmation. The marines had been in
it. Apparently they had been thrown in to stop a gap, and had stopped it
effectively. Kendall knew that this meant the second division,
comprising two regiments of marines and some of the old Regular Army.
They had been thrown across the Paris-Metz road—and the _boches_ had
been halted abruptly. It was glorious, thrilling news.

“How would you like to go to a little restaurant where I eat once in a
while? It’s very Parisian. There will be no Americans there, and while
it doesn’t look much, the food is bully and the crowd amusing.”

“Fine!” she said, and he stopped a passing taxicab. By dint of many
repetitions he was able to make the chauffeur comprehend that he wanted
to be driven to Marty’s on the rue de Richelieu.

They were a trifle early. Few of the regular _habitués de maison_ were
present yet, and they had their choice of tables. Ken selected the one
at which he had sat the other evening. One by one the regulars appeared
and, recognizing Kendall, smiled and nodded. Monsieur Robert appeared
with the Spanish tragedian, and Monsieur Robert came over to shake hands
and be very cordial. Ken presented him to Maude and watched her face
with amusement when the handsome young actor bent over her hand and
kissed it. Then entered the elderly critic with the pointed white beard
who was invariably accompanied by a beautiful girl—a new beautiful girl
every evening. And then appeared Monsieur Jacques, swinging his
artificial leg hilariously, waving his cane, and with his hat awry, as
was its custom. He shouted greetings to all, then, espying Kendall, he
rushed to his chair, clapped the captain on the back, and, turning,
harangued the room. His subject was Americans. The Americans were
heroic. They had appeared in France’s hour of need. They were shedding
their blood in France’s quarrel, and France should proclaim her
gratitude. Had not these so-much-to-be-loved Americans saved Paris from
the _boche_. But certainly! That very day.... _Vive l’Amérique!..._
Suddenly, in a transport of enthusiasm, he threw his arm about Kendall’s
neck and kissed him resoundingly on both cheeks....

Kendall was frightfully embarrassed, especially when he heard the room
laugh until the dishes rocked. He was angry, but before he could give
vent to his anger his eye encountered Maude Knox, mirthful tears rolling
down her cheeks. Then he himself laughed, if a bit ruefully. Jacques
threw himself into a seat across the table and began talking in his wild
way to Maude Knox, who spoke French very well indeed. There was no need
for introductions here. Jacques never thought of such a thing and Maude
appeared perfectly willing to forgo the ceremony. Kendall was rather out
of it temporarily. He looked across at Monsieur Robert, who was bobbing
his head and laughing and writing on the back of a _carte de jour_....
Then he arose and handed it to Kendall.

Monsieur had a trifle of English of which he was very proud, and this
communication, relating to Jacques, was couched in that language. Ken
read it and then laughed in real earnest, for it made this rather
amazing announcement:

“It is not a bad boy, but he is a few mad!”

What more could one ask of a single sentence?

“If you are looking for something un-American you get it here,” he said
to Maude.

“I like it.... I’m enjoying every second of it,” she said, delightedly.
“They’re just like children.”

“But Jacques here has an artificial leg, a silver plate in the crown of
his head, the Médaille Militaire and the Croix de Guerre,” he said.

Jacques, meantime, had possessed himself of Monsieur Robert’s note and,
leaping to his feet, was heaping scorn and derision on the young actor’s
head, while Monsieur Robert feigned terror and made as though he would
hide under the table.

“Are they always like this,” Maude asked, “or is it relief—now that
Paris seems to be safe?”

“They are always so,” he said.

“I envy them.... But it couldn’t happen in America, could it? Imagine
this in Cleveland or Detroit. Why, everybody would be put out by the
management, or the police would be called in! And why?... I’m learning a
lot since I came to France.... There’s something in the very air here.
One could do things never dreamed of at home.... I don’t know what it
is, but that’s the way I feel. Maybe it is the freedom from restraint,
maybe it’s the example, maybe it is that the war is so tremendous that
nothing a single individual can do is of the least importance.... But
the feeling is there. Other girls have told me the same thing.”

“Paris does get you,” said Ken.

“Things don’t seem to matter,” she said, thoughtfully. “It’s like being
in a different world where none of the old rules hold good.... I can’t
imagine myself talking like this or feeling like this. I couldn’t have a
month ago.... I think,” she said, with a little laugh, “that I shall
have to keep my head very level.”

Ken was astonished. So the thing was getting Maude Knox, too! She saw a
difference, felt a difference, felt the challenge of a difference! “It
gets you.... It gets you,” he said, helplessly.

“Sometimes I have a feeling that I’d like to throw up the whole show and
live here forever—be a lotus-eater,” she said, with more seriousness.
“If I were a man—”

“Yes?”

She shrugged her shoulders. “What’s the use?... But I’ll say this—I’m
never going to see things with the same eyes again. I think I’ll be able
to understand that there are two sides to a story.”

This was the same Maude Knox he had known on the vessel crossing the
ocean—a Maude Knox who quite typified his ideas of the _nice_ American
girl, the sheltered, protected, almost prudish creature of his
experience! She had traveled far—and yet she was not less nice because
she had seen more of the life that inhabits the planet, nor because she
had acquired a certain tolerance for manners and customs that were
impossible for herself. It seemed as if she were passing through much
the same mental conflict as himself. Perhaps it was not so pronounced
with her because her experiences had not been so pronounced. But she
seemed to have reached a surer conclusion than he. However, she had
never had his mother. Her inheritances were different, and her
upbringing by her philosopher father had, perhaps, made it possible for
her to progress more rapidly in understanding and clear seeing than
himself.

“For instance,” she said, “if I had met you with that little French girl
a month ago I should probably have cut you.... Especially when you wore
such a guilty look....”

“It wasn’t a guilty look. I—Andree is a mighty nice girl. I introduced
her to you, didn’t I?... Well?”

Her eyes twinkled. He could not decide whether it were derision or
unbelief, and he felt very uncomfortable in consequence. “Just because
she’s French ...” he commenced.

“The young man doth protest too much,” she said. “But what I was going
to say was that it didn’t seem to matter in the least. I suppose it
ought to, but it didn’t.... She looked like such a nice, sweet little
thing.”

“She is.”

“And that’s why the life here in Paris is so bewildering. It upsets all
one’s preconceived notions. It makes one wonder....”

“It does,” he said, emphatically.

“I presume I should be just as intolerant back home as I ever was.”

“It’s different back home.”

“Extremely,” she said, dryly.

Jacques turned suddenly to Maude as the male dressmaker came in with his
pink-cheeked companion of the other night. “You see her,” he said, as
one about to make a statement of distinct interest to the one addressed.
“She ees his girl—yes.... I theenk she look for anozzer boy. Bicause
thees dressmaker, he is ver’ selfish. He make mooch money, but he theenk
only of himself. It ees so.... For example!... He make that yo’ng girl
do _so_—how you say?” He went through the pantomime of shining his
shoes. “That ees not pleasant. _N’est-ce pas?..._ So I theenk she look
about for anozzer boy....”

Kendall felt his ears growing hot, and was on the point of committing an
indiscretion when Maude answered with a quaver of mirth in her voice,
and not the least of the anger and shocked indignation Kendall expected.
“I should think she would....”

Presently Kendall called for the check and they went out, Jacques
insisting on shaking hands with both of them, and appearing to be on the
point of kissing Ken all over again.

“How shall we keep up the celebration?” Ken asked when they were out on
the dark, narrow street.

“Let’s walk,” she said. “Paris fascinates me at night. I love to stroll
about, but usually I have to go in so early. Are you too tired to walk
up the Champs Élysées and possibly on to the Bois de Boulogne?”

“Indeed not!” he said, and they started off with good American strides,
dodging taxicabs that came charging down upon them out of the darkness
with lights so dim as to be scarcely visible, and almost bumping into
pedestrians who loomed up suddenly out of the blackness ahead. In a few
moments they emerged upon the broader thoroughfares where visibility was
higher, and presently were walking up the rue de Rivoli toward the
Étoile.

Kendall was feeling a new and different interest in Maude Knox. He had
been attracted to her casually on the boat, for she had been very
pleasant to look at, and a charming companion. But she had not impressed
him other than with a mild pleasantness, calling forth a temporary
friendliness. To-night he felt that he really _liked_ her; that there
was something to her. She had disclosed that there was a certain kinship
between their mental processes and their reactions to the new life that
surrounded them, but most of all she had shown herself adaptable and
_sensible_. Sensible covered a multitude of meanings for Ken. His idea
of girls was that they were creatures full of peculiar concealments and
inhibitions who had a habit of looking at facts obliquely and
interpreting them without frankness. Somehow they never seemed exactly
sincere to him, but rather as if they felt compelled to certain
pretenses as a measure of self-protection. His impression was that
American girls were always conscious of the necessity for protecting
themselves, and this destroyed comradeship and good understanding.... It
was his notion that they were constantly on their guard against a danger
which they rather feared did not exist....

But to-night Maude Knox seemed very different from all this; she seemed
frank and fearless. She had seen more than her sisters back home, and it
had not shocked her especially. She was capable of entering into the
spirit of the life—at least theoretically—and she treated him, Kendall,
as an equal and a friend rather than as a male to be kept in his place
lest he pounce upon her with dire consequences.... He liked it. He liked
the way she talked, and he liked the air with which she carried herself.

Half an hour later they were seated on uncomfortable iron chairs beside
the Avenue du Bois de Boulogne, watching a string of American ambulances
whiz by from the hospital beyond, on their way to one of the stations to
meet a train bearing wounded from the front.

“It makes one realize that we’re in it,” Maude said, gravely. “It hardly
seems possible that those ambulances will be back in an hour filled with
American boys—wounded in France by the Germans. There’s something unreal
about it.... To think that those boys have crossed the ocean to be
wounded and mutilated over here!... I wonder if they are sending any of
the wounded home.”

“I don’t know.”

“The folks won’t realize this war till they see boys on crutches....”

Before them the promenaders straggled, dim forms in the dusk, only to be
distinguished when they passed within reach of the arm. There were
parties of three or four girls of the working-class hurrying home with
packages under their arms; there were other parties who dawdled and
laughed and jostled one another and giggled—young shop or factory girls
out to enjoy the evening. There were young men and young women who
walked very close to each other, sometimes holding hands. There were
single young men and young men in pairs out for walk and adventure.
There were officers of all armies and a sprinkling of American doughboys
ready for whatever might happen, often three or four of them with a
single girl, all jolly and laughing and having the most enjoyable sort
of time trying to make themselves understood to one another. At a little
distance two neat-looking girls were seriously giving a French lesson to
a group of American soldiers.... It was such a company of strollers and
dawdlers as the concerns of the world had never brought together before,
drawn from all habitable quarters of the globe because the Hun, in his
ruthless ambition, had thought to spread his _Kultur_ over the face of
the planet....

There were long lapses in the conversation, for both Maude and Kendall
found a gripping interest in the passers-by.

“Just think,” said Maude, presently, “almost every girl we see has lost
a father or a brother or a sweetheart or a husband. Almost every one....
A waitress in our hotel told me this morning that eleven men of her
family were dead.”

“Yes,” he said.

“But somehow the thing that—that _frightens_ me most is not to think of
the women who have lost fathers and brothers, or even husbands.... It is
the girls who have lost sweethearts. It is the thought of the boys who
are dead and who were to have been the husbands of these girls.... Think
of the hundreds of them who have lost husbands whom, perhaps, they have
never met ... whom they can never meet.... It’s awful to think of a
million girls who have _got_ to be old maids! They don’t want to be, but
they’ve _got_ to be.... War has taken from them the husbands they never
had.”

“I’ve thought of that,” he said.

“It means these girls have lost more than life—they have had killed for
them the possibility of living.... They can never have homes and
families.... The future is nothing but a stretch of years for
them—lonesome years without happiness and without sorrow.”

“I suppose it is as hard to be deprived of sorrow as it is of
happiness,” said Kendall, slowly.

She paused before replying. “Yes,” she said, “I can understand that—if
the sorrow is brought because you love. Sorrow is a necessary experience
of life. Emerson’s essay on compensation is all about that....” She
paused again and then broke out with a vehemence foreign to her. “I
don’t blame them—I don’t blame them a bit. Everybody is entitled to live
and to have the experiences of life. I never thought I should feel this
way, but it is _so_.... If you can have a life full of living you are
entitled to snatch your little moments of happiness—just as these French
girls are doing. It is their right, because it is the best life has to
offer them.... It isn’t France alone—it might happen in America. Suppose
half the girls at home were deprived of the possibility of marriage....
It’s awful.”

The little moments of happiness! Kendall’s mind seized on that phrase
and held it.... It was the essence of the whole matter. These women,
shut out from the Banquet of Life, were seizing hungrily the crumbs of
happiness that were brushed from the table.

In the pause that followed an American soldier and a French girl sat
down in the chairs at the right of Maude and Kendall and talked jerkily,
half in French, half in English. They tried so hard to talk to each
other, because each was lonesome.... And then, as Kendall and Maude
eavesdropped shamelessly, the siren sounded—the _Gothas_ were coming!

People started to their feet and began scurrying away to seek for
shelter, but Maude and Kendall did not move, nor did the boy and girl
next them. Presently Kendall heard the boy ask, “Ain’t you afraid of the
bombs, mademoiselle?”

“_Non.... Non...._” She shrugged her shoulders and then said, in a
hopeless voice, a pitiful voice: “I have not the fear, because what does
it matter?... There is nothing in life for me. If I am kill—_pouf!...
So...._ There is an end, and it will be well....”

Kendall felt Maude’s fingers on his arm, felt their sudden pressure.
“There,” she whispered. “There it is.... She _knows_. They all know....
Who has a right to say they sha’n’t have their little moments?...”

Kendall stood up. It seemed as if movement were necessary, any sort of
movement, of physical action. This sudden, close contact with terrible
reality had seared through to his consciousness with a terrible, burning
depression.... The thing was unbearable.... And this, he thought, is
what war means!...

“Come,” he said, almost roughly.

She arose obediently and they walked rapidly toward the Étoile.

“We have fifteen minutes,” he said. “If we walk fast we can almost make
your hotel.”

As they walked the now almost deserted streets, deserted except for
stragglers and for taxicabs which went scurrying about as they always
do, not oblivious to bomb raids, but in defiance of them, they saw huge,
mysterious bodies arising from the shrubbery, great grub-shapes that
appeared from nowhere and mounted high into the heavens—the sausage
balloons which in time of raid stretch in interminable line across the
sky down the path of the Avenue du Bois de Boulogne and the Champs
Élysées and the Jardin des Tuileries. They were so silent, so
mysterious, such ghostly-gray blots against the sky!

They reached the Place de la Concorde before the first gun of the
barrage sounded, and in a moment were safely under the arches of the
buildings that face the rue de Rivoli.... And then the storm broke in
all its fury.

Kendall waited for Maude’s reactions. It was a sort of test. There was
danger, real danger, even under those huge stone arches—if a bomb should
strike directly above them or in the street without. He wanted to see
how she would behave in presence of danger.

She satisfied him. She exhibited, not fear, but curiosity and a
childlike interest, as if it were some sort of spectacle, and she were
disappointed at not having a better seat. It was impossible to keep her
back from the curb, for she insisted on standing in the very mouth of
the arch to see all that was to be seen.... She had courage as well as
frankness and understanding. His admiration for her grew amazingly.

In an hour the raid was over and they continued their way to the Hôtel
Wagram.

“Good night,” she said, extending her hand and giving him a pressure of
real friendship. “I’ve enjoyed this evening—more than any other since
I’ve been here.”

“It has been bully,” he said. “I feel as if I were just getting
acquainted with you.... It’s hard luck you’re going so soon—but you’ll
be back.”

She laughed. “You won’t be lonesome,” she said, gaily. “There’s that
cunning little French girl of yours—who doesn’t seem to have any last
name.... Mademoiselle Andree.” She laughed again. “What is her last
name? You know it isn’t usual to introduce strangers by their given
names, as you did.”

He laughed ruefully. “I’m darned if I know,” he said. “I always forget
to ask her.” It was a reply that would have been impossible for him to
make to Maude Knox six hours before.

Her face grew serious and she touched his arm with her fingers lightly.
“She had a sweet face,” Maude said. “Don’t be unkind to her.... Now good
night. To-morrow I’ll be where I can hear the guns.”

“Good night,” he said, and turned away.

He was repeating to himself what Maude had said: “Don’t be unkind to
her.... Don’t be unkind to her.” What was he to do? How was he to deal
with that quaint little person who appeared out of mystery to assume
such an important place in his life?... Was not merely knowing her being
unkind to her?... Or was he giving her her little moment of
happiness?...




                              CHAPTER VIII


All day Kendall had been comparing Maude Knox with Andree. When he left
the American girl and went home to his apartment he had been under the
spell of her American manner, of her frankness, of the undefinable
something which one finds in all American girls of the college type, of
the cultured type, which is to be found in no other women the world
over. When you have called it the American manner you have done your
best at description.... It was the old story of like calling to like, of
that to which one is accustomed seeming to be more desirable than even
the most delightful of novelties. It was the call of home, the call of
race, a thing that can never be negligible in the affairs of mankind.

A night of sleep rounded the sharp peaks of his impressions. When he
awoke in the morning he did not see Maude Knox so distinctly, but an
impression remained with him that would be permanent—that she was
splendid, desirable, the sort of girl a fellow would like to be very
well acquainted with. He went no farther than that. He was not so near
to being in love with her as he was with Andree, or, if he were, he
failed to recognize it.... He did recognize that Andree had become an
important personage in his life, so important that he could not think of
another girl without thinking immediately of her.

She was everything that Maude Knox was not and Maude Knox seemed to be
everything that Andree was not. There was no single point at which their
characters converged and ran parallel—except that both were “nice”....
And even their “niceness” was different. Kendall understood Maude’s
niceness perfectly; Andree’s was a mystery to him; it was something he
felt, but could not set down in any known terms.

One could readily imagine Maude playing golf or swimming or driving a
car furiously and capably; it was impossible to imagine Andree doing any
of these things. Andree was utterly feminine. One could be pals with
Maude; with Andree, Kendall felt one could be bare acquaintance or
sweetheart—nothing else.... One felt that Andree would give and give and
give, asking only love in return: Maude would give and give, but would
demand, as American women do, a like amount of giving in return.

Also, in the attraction which Andree exercised were the elements of
mystery and of danger. It was something that he knew nothing about her;
that she appeared as out of nothingness, and then disappeared into black
night again—and that he was apprehensive as to where his acquaintance
with her was leading him. To a young man of some imagination these two
factors were compelling.... The more he thought of the girls that day
the stronger grew his desire to be with Andree—to taste the charm of her
presence and to sense the mystery that surrounded her, the mystery of
herself and the mystery of a great race, apparent in her, and not
understandable by him.

He was at the place of meeting early and there paced back and forth
before the entrance to subterranean Paris, watching the crowds and
waiting with impatience. The crowd was an old story to him now, but it
never quite lost its fascination, never quite laid aside that air of
unreality, of _foreignness_, of eventfulness that made the Paris throng
of those days what it was—foreign in the eyes of the foreigner and
foreign in the eyes of the Parisian.... He saw a slender girl—she seemed
not more than twenty—bidding farewell to a youthful soldier. Their
good-by was unrestrained and affecting. He was going to the north—to the
battle-line—and always was the possibility that he might never return.
It spoke eloquently in the fervor of that farewell.... They stood,
locked in each other’s arms while their lips met again and again—with
all the world to see. But none pointed or smiled. The world understood,
and the heart of the world moved in sympathy.... Here was another girl
who might never know the joys of wife or mother. If that young man did
not return, she, fortunate in the possession of a sweetheart, might
descend from her high place of happiness and security to the drab,
hopeless level of her million sisters.... It was no ordinary parting—it
was a parting with more than a loved one, for it was a possible parting
with the right to live....

Then Andree appeared, in white once more, walking with tiny, demure
little steps, unsmiling, apparently unconscious that she was not alone
on that crowded corner. So she always came. At one moment she was not
there; the next moment she appeared—from her mystery—appeared so
modestly, so diffidently. Kendall said to himself that she came like
some fairy, afraid lest a hostile glance or a human touch might send her
back all too soon to the fairyland whence she came....

He advanced to meet her and, as she always did, she stopped as if
startled, raised her eyes to his gravely, as if she had never seen him
before, and then smiled that little smile which seemed to say that she
was uncertain of her welcome, but hoped she would find it warm. Her
slender hand was in his, with quaint formality, and she said in French:
“Good-day, monsieur. How carry you yourself?”

“Very well. Very well. And you?”

“Oh, I have been bored! I have had to make a visit of duty. It was very
tiresome....”

Then came the short, awkward pause while they adjusted themselves to
each other and sought for words in languages strange with which to begin
conversation. It was always so—that they spoke little for the first five
minutes after a meeting. Neither seemed to find words to begin. Then she
said, looking at him sidewise, with the merest hint of a smile in her
lovely eyes, “Have you thought of me?”

“When I lifted up.” He laughed at this quotation of her literal
translation of the French for _arise_. “In the morning, at noon, all the
afternoon—always.”

“It is well,” she said. “I also have thought of you.”

“Where shall we eat?”

“I do not care.... It makes nothing.... Is Arlette well?” She laughed a
little at recollection of Arlette.

For a few moments they walked along undecided, and then Kendall looked
up to see Monsieur Robert approaching.

“Here’s your actor,” he said.

“What actor, monsieur?”

“Monsieur Robert.”

“You know heem?”

“I told you about him.”

“Yes.... Yes.... That was well.”

Monsieur Robert recognized Kendall, and looked quickly at Andree; then
he smiled and waggled his head in the charming, boyish way he had, and
lifted his hat.

“Good night,” he said, making a display of his English and extending his
hand.

“Monsieur Robert, permit me, Mademoiselle Andree.”

The young actor took her hand and, with a smile that was half a laugh,
bowed over it and made some response in French which was not
intelligible to Kendall.

“Mademoiselle wishes to enter your profession,” Kendall said, with a
twinkle in his eye. “She is going to the _Académie_ in September.”

“Ah....” Monsieur Robert looked at her more carefully. “You enter the
_Académie_?”

“I do not know—I hope.... I am working very hard.”

“And you wish to be an actress?... It is well. But why?”

“So she can come to New York, _à la_ Madame Bernhardt, and bring home
much money, and be too proud to know an old friend like myself when I
sit in the front row and applaud.”

She smiled up at him. “When I come in New York you will go to see me?...
But I shall be very great and famous. Oh yes. But I shall remember you,
of a surety.... I shall remember you—a little.” There was an infinity of
subdued roguishness about her.

Monsieur Robert was studying Andree with interest. “You will be ver’
pretty actress,” he said, haltingly, speaking in English so that Kendall
would share in the compliment.

“You bet,” said Ken, spontaneously, and then, with characteristic
American directness: “What’s this about the necessity for having some
actor speak for her? She says she cannot enter unless some actor says a
good word for her.”

“It makes the matter with more facility,” said Monsieur Robert.

Andree looked from Kendall to the young actor timidly, almost with the
shyness of a child.

“Why not come and dine with us?” said Ken.

“I should be delighted, but it is not possible for me to-night. I am—how
you say?—_très-occupé_.... But some other night—very soon.... With
mademoiselle.” He waggled his head again and laughed his pleasing,
boyish laugh.

“Shall we say to-morrow?”

“Oh, very well.”

“If it is possible for mademoiselle,” and Kendall looked at Andree.

“Yes,” she said, “to-morrow.”

“At Marty’s,” said Monsieur Robert.

“Seven o’clock?”

“It is well.... _Au revoir, mademoiselle et monsieur._ Until to-morrow.”

Presently Kendall stopped. “By Jove!” he said, “I forgot to tell Arlette
I wouldn’t be home to dinner. She will have it ready. Shall we dine with
her?”

“As you like.”

“And afterward we can sit and talk.”

“Oh, if only you can speak more French.... There are so many things we
could speak of. I should like to talk of many things to you—and to read
you poems.... You know French poets?”

Ken shook his head. “You like poetry, don’t you?... I’ll bet you’re a
poet yourself? Don’t you make poems?”

“One leetle book,” she said, with a rueful shake of the head. “One
leetle, small book.... But it was not good—oh no. In it are only two
poems that are good. The rest are bad, ver’, ver’ bad.”

“I don’t believe a word of it. I’ll bet they’re great.”

“_Non ... non!..._ I will bring them to you and you shall see.... But
no. It is not possible for you to read. I am so sad ... so sad.” She
laughed a little to show that she was not sad at all, and tripped along
by his side, almost instantly returning to that quaint gravity which
always baffled Kendall. He never could tell whether it was real gravity
or a sort of protective coloring such as birds use to make themselves
invisible to the hostile eye.

As they descended into the Metro they met, coming up the stairs, a
handsomely dressed young woman, exquisitely shod, but so painted as to
cheeks that one could not possibly imagine what her natural complexion
might have been. She looked at Kendall boldly.

“Camouflage,” said Andree, serenely, when the young woman had passed. “I
do not like ...”

It was not the first time Kendall had heard that Parisian term applied
to the painted face, but he laughed now as if it were a fresh witticism
to him. Andree made it fresh, for any sort of slang sounded so unnatural
from her lips as to be irresistibly ludicrous ... like the harmless
precocity of a child.

“_Vous êtes très-jolie_,” he said, with decision.

“No.... I am not pretty. You do not theenk. You make mock of me.” And
then, as he wrinkled his nose: “Oh, why do you make _grimace_?... It is
not nice for make _grimace_ at me.... And now—oh, I see—your left eye it
laughs, and the other it does not. Why is that? Why does your left eye
laugh?” She pointed accusingly at the offending eye and stopped still,
shaking her head. “Oh, you are ver’ bad. I do not like you.... No....
No.... I do not like you.” And then she laughed with that sudden change
from mock gravity to delicious merriment of which she alone, of all the
people Kendall knew, was capable.

When she did that she was so alluring, so cunning, that Kendall had to
hold his arms stiff at his sides to prevent them from picking her up and
cuddling her and kissing her.... It seemed that humor of hers was given
her to tempt kisses. Yet there was nothing deliberately provocative
about her, nothing. Quite the contrary. It seemed rather her desire to
suppress such things as demonstrations of affection than to provoke
them.

At the apartment the _concierge_ bowed and smiled to them, and wished
them a good evening. Up-stairs Arlette was manifestly upset by the
appearance of an unexpected guest, but Andree disappeared into the
kitchen, whence emerged a whirlwind of chatter, and all was well....
Bert was just finishing shaving.

“Andree, eh?” he said. “Why didn’t you tip me off, and I’d have gathered
up Madeleine.”

“I don’t know.... I—” Kendall was thinking about the other night.

“Piffle!” said Bert. Then, “Do you mean to tell me—”

“I certainly do mean to tell you,” Ken said, belligerently.

“You get me, young fellow. You sure do....”

“Oh, dry up, and come to dinner—and behave if you can manage it.”
Kendall went into the _salon_ to rejoin Andree, more than a little
apprehensive of the future if it should throw Andree and Madeleine
together.

Andree was looking about the room with humorous toleration from a seat
in the outrageous piece of furniture which she had claimed as her
throne. “Mademoiselle Madeleine—she is not here?”

“No.”

“It is not well. Go and fetch her.... Now.... At once. Or I shall go
away.” She shook her head and made stiff little gestures with her hand,
but when he stood in front of her she twinkled at him and placed both
hands in his when he held them out toward her. He retained them a moment
and then raised them to his lips.

“You’re a sweet child,” he said.

“Oh, I do not onderstan’....I do not know.... Where is the
_dictionnaire_?”

“No matter.... There’s Arlette announcing dinner.” It was Arlette’s
custom to poke her head through the door when dinner was ready and to
stare into the room silently and a little affrightedly. She never spoke.
It was necessary to watch for the appearance of her head if one wanted
to know when the meal was served.

Bert came in and Andree asked after Madeleine’s health as if she
considered Bert personally responsible for it, demanding why she was not
present.

“Ken’s afraid you don’t like her,” Bert said, mischievously.

“_Mais oui.... Mais oui._ I do like. I like ver’ much. Why you theenk?”
She turned to Ken with the question.

“Don’t pay any attention to Bert. He thinks he has a sense of humor,”
Ken said, but his ears were red, nevertheless, a circumstance which did
not escape Andree’s sharp eyes. She let the matter pass and addressed
herself to her food with that detachment from all other matters which
always brought a smile to Kendall’s face. There were so many quaint,
delightful attributes in her....

Toward the end of the dinner the diners heard a subdued whispering and
giggling without, and then appeared little Arlette, bearing a dessert—a
wonderful dessert. It was a pudding with a white frothiness of beaten
egg covering it. It was a real dessert—the first, if one excepts fruit
and ices without authority, that Ken had seen since he came to France.
Little Arlette carried it to the table, and stood, big-eyed, mouth
pursed, waiting for the astonishment which the miracle was to cause....
Arlette herself, wiping her chin on the back of her hand and grinning
with delight, allowed her head to be seen through the door.

“It is from the _concierge_,” she said, very rapidly. “She sends it to
messieurs with her compliments.”

“Now that’s mighty nice. You thank her, Arlette, and we’ll thank her
when we go down.... I guess we haven’t made a hit with madame, eh?...
And, _mignonne_! We must have another place, Arlette, and a spoon. But
_mignonne_ does not like pudding, eh?”

“_Oui_,” said little Arlette, her eyes growing even bigger, and the
pucker turning into a smile.

Kendall settled the child at table and then gravely introduced her to
Andree.

“She goes to America with me, you are to understand. I am about to ask
Arlette for this young lady’s hand. But yes. We are very fond of each
other. Is it not so, mademoiselle?”

“Yes, monsieur,” replied little Arlette, very gravely.

“Oh!... Oh!... You are ver’ naughty. I am jealous. I shall not stay. I
shall go away.”

Little Arlette observed her gravely. “Monsieur will be my husband,” she
said. “It is arranged.”

“Poor myself!... I am sad. I shall to weep.”

Arlette looked at Andree interestedly and expectantly and cheerfully,
not displeased to have caused this frightful storm of jealousy and well
prepared to rejoice in the tears of her defeated rival.

Kendall carried the mite into the other room and placed her on the sofa
between himself and Andree, where she snuggled up to him with a charming
little air of proprietorship. Andree bent suddenly to kiss the child,
and then turned her head away and gazed out of the window....

“Now you shall sing for me,” said Kendall.

Little Arlette stood very erect and sang in a sweet little voice that
carried the airs very accurately, sang the songs of the street and the
music-halls and of the _poilus_, while her grandmother stood just within
the dining-room, wrapping and unwrapping her pudgy hands in her apron
and grinning and nodding her head with enormous pride. The child sang
with great seriousness, her head a little back, looking for all the
world like a bird on the nest opening its beak for the mother bird to
drop in a worm.... When she was through, and both Andree and Arlette
laughed at some of the songs especially, though Ken could not understand
a word, he put a franc in her hand and kissed her. Andree snatched her
up and held her close and murmured in her ear.

“Come now,” said Arlette, and the baby shook hands ceremoniously.

“You must begin to get ready to go to America,” Kendall said.

“Yes, monsieur,” she responded, and went out, turning at every step to
wave her hand in farewell.

Bert came back into the room, cap in hand, and said good night.

“And what shall we do?” Kendall asked when he was gone.

“We shall sit and talk,” she replied.

“About what?”

“You shall tell to me many things.... If there really is a building of
fifty stories high in New York, and when the war will finish, and if
actors make much money in America, and also dancers.... Here the dancers
do not make much money. Even the best.... _Non...._ A few—yes. Madame
Duncan.... But in _Amérique_—is it not the same?”

“They earn lots of money—heaps.”

“_Pourquoi?_”

“I don’t know. They just do. People go to see them. Why don’t they make
much money here?”

She shook her head. “I do not know. The people they do not go for see a
dancer.... Maybe, if I cannot enter into the _Conservatoire_, I shall
become a dancer and take myself to _Amérique_. But that is very hard....
One must start in the music-halls, and I do not like.”

“I should say _not_.” Kendall thought of her in the atmosphere of the
Paris music-hall and his soul revolted.

“_Pourquoi?_” she asked again.

“Mademoiselle Pourquoi.... Because you are a nice child, and the
music-halls are not nice.”

She smiled at him. “You theenk I am nice?”

“I think so many things about you...”

“Oh, I do not onderstan’.” Her mock despair was very pathetic until her
sudden laughter changed it to delight. In revenge she discharged a
volley of rapid French at him for two minutes. “You see?... It is not
nice to not onderstan’. You must _es_-tudy French ver’ hard, and I will
_es_-tudy English so w’en I go to New York...”

Her mood changed. “I am sad—ver’ sad.... Life, it is not good.... No.”

“Life is mighty confusing,” he said. “Why are you sad?”

“Because I am _solitaire_—and because there is so much miserable.
_Oui...._ There is little happiness—only _les petites minutes_.... But
all the time life is not well.”

The _petites minutes_!... The little minutes! There it was again, the
same thought that Maude Knox had put into words. The little moments of
happiness. Andree searched for them, too. She felt that the best life
had to offer her were rare and transitory moments of joy.

“_Pauvre petite!_” he said, and took her hand. “You should be always
glad. It isn’t right for you to be sad. You weren’t built to be sad....
It’s rotten.”

“Yes,” she said, pensively, not understanding all his words, but
comprehending their meaning from his tone.

It filled him with anger to think of this child whom sorrow had no right
to touch for years—to think of her life as clouded at the moment when it
should have been filled with joys. It was unfair.... Life had no right
to treat her so. Sympathy and tenderness moved him, and he placed his
arm about her and drew her to him. She did not resist, nor did she
respond, even when he turned her face upward and kissed her. Her lips
were cold.... If nothing but little minutes of happiness were possible
for her, he vowed in his heart that he would make them more numerous.

He continued to hold her, and she lay in his arms unresisting while he
whispered to her as he would have whispered to an unhappy child—yet not
as he would have whispered to a child. The touch of her, her nearness,
her sweet fragility mounted to his head.

“I want you to be very happy ... because I love you,” he said, and,
saying it, he believed it. There was room in his thoughts for nothing
but her in that moment. Inhibitions were forgotten, apprehensions laid
aside—the youth in his heart cried out to the youth in her heart—nothing
remained but youth and love and a great sympathy. He did not look to the
future. The sharp voice of conscience, suspicious, narrow, inherited
from his mother, was silenced. Not that he was consciously running
counter to the demands of that conscience! He was living that minute
with no thought of what the next minute might bring....

Andree freed herself and looked at him gravely, with a sad scrutiny.
“No,” she said. “You do not love me.... It is not possible.”

“But I do.... I do.... Don’t you love me a little—just a little?”

“Oh,” she said in a little voice, “I am afraid....”

“Afraid? ... Of what?”

“I do not know.... I am so _solitaire_—so lonely—and I am afraid.”

“If you love me—”

“_Non!... Non!..._ You do not love me. You only say. And if I love
you—in a week, in two week, you go away to _Amérique_ and leave me to be
more _solitaire_.... I should be more sad....”

“No,” he declared, and was about to expostulate and to declare that he
would never leave her, but the words would not come. His mother had
stepped in. “You will love me,” he declared, in spite of his mother. “We
will love each other—and there will be happiness.... If the best we can
have is little moments of happiness, let us have all we can of them.” He
was honest, thought he was being honest in his sophistry.

“You would go away—in a week, in a month....”

“No, no!”

He saw that she was crying, and suddenly she turned from him to bury her
face in her arms and to sob quietly, not unrestrainedly, but with such a
quietness as went with powerful impulse to his heart, and he gathered
her to him again and tried to comfort her.

“Why do you cry? What is it, _mignonne_?”

She shook her head. “I do not know,” she said, but he knew that she did
know and would not tell. “I will go home now.... I am sad, and you will
not like me when I am sad.”

“I like you any way you choose to be,” he said, holding her close. She
did not respond to his caresses, neither did she repulse them. She was
simply negative, as if they were not happening to her at all. “I love
you,” he repeated, insistently.

“No....” She wiped her eyes and got to her feet. “I must go to my house.
Will you come?” she asked, shyly.

“Of course.... But—”

“No.... No.... You do not love me. You cannot. I do not believe—and I am
afraid.”

They walked down the street in silence. Kendall tried to talk, but grew
discouraged, for Andree was intent, thinking, thinking, thinking, and
would not talk.... He wondered if it were the end of matters between
them, if he had been too impetuous and had frightened her away. The
thought frightened him, and he tried to reassure her, but could find no
words. He did not know how to reassure her, because he did not know what
she feared or what she was thinking.... How was he to understand? His
eyes were not clear to see into her world, or his intelligence to
understand it. He had declared his love to her as he would have declared
it to an American girl—that and nothing more. And she—what was she
thinking? What was going on inside that dainty, that sad little head? He
spoke of love in American; she understood him in French. How was he to
know that?

They spoke hardly a word as the Metro carried them to the Place
St.-Michel, nor was the silence broken as they walked slowly up the
darkened Boulevard, so dark that at times they had actually to feel
their way through a spot of blackness. There was an occasional dim blue
street light, but no lights were visible from any interior.... The
shining out of the feeblest of lights would have brought next day a
summons to appear before the police to explain the matter. Paris was
severe in the matter of lights. Kendall had seen the people stone an
automobile at night because the driver had neglected to dim his lamps!
The city had no humor in its appreciation of air raids.

Andree did not make him turn back at the usual spot. She seemed to have
forgotten him, though she clung to his arm, and they went on to broad
rue Soufflot, which leads off the Boulevard at right angles to the
Panthéon. In the middle of the first block Andree paused.

“It is necessary to go back now,” she said, turning her face to him, and
he bent over so that he might see its expression.

“Why did you cry?” he asked

“Because I was afraid,” she said.

“You are not afraid now?”

“I—I have said I shall not have fear.”

He took both her hands and drew her close to him. There were none to
see. The street was deserted. Even the tables and chairs of the café at
the corner were piled in close to the wall.

“You love me a little?” he insisted.

There was a tiny pause. “Yes,” she said. It was a queer, decided little
syllable, uttered as after mature deliberation. She was looking up into
his face.

“_Mignonne!_” he said, softly, and kissed her. This time her lips were
not cold, his caress was not tolerated, but returned. She returned his
kiss. It was not the first girl Kendall had kissed, but it opened his
eyes to the possibilities of a kiss. It went to his head, and he
snatched her up in his arms as if she had been a baby. “You love me?...
You will always love me?”

“Yes,” she said, in that same voice of calm decision. “And you?”

“Always.... Always,” he said.

“_Non...._ I know. For a week, for a month.... That is all. You are not
_fidèle_.... You will go away and I shall be sad. I know, but I am
lonely.” She kissed him. “But we shall be glad,” she said, wistfully.
“We shall have happiness—many little minutes of happiness. I shall
pretend that you never go away to leave me _solitaire_....”

What could he say? He protested and asserted, but she smiled a grave
smile of knowledge and of resignation. She knew what she knew.
“To-morrow,” she said. “Place de la Concorde. _Sept heures._”

“And you love me?”

“Do you not believe?” she asked, sweetly.

“Yes.”

“It is well.... Good night, monsieur. To-morrow.”

She kissed him again and freed herself. In another moment her daintiness
had been engulfed in the mysterious blackness. Once more she had
vanished into her fairy-land.... Each time he wondered if it could be
possible that there should be another visitation.

Kendall, young, inexperienced in serious thought as he was, realized
that some sort of crisis in his life had arrived; events impended which
were to modify him, which were to affect him and to continue to affect
him so long as life should last. He did not know what. He did not
realize what had just happened to him and to Andree, and yet he wondered
... wondered. And he loved her; he was sure of it. Just as he was sure
she was worthy of his love!

He was exalted, yet he was troubled, perplexed, worried, so he walked.
At the Boulevard St.-Germain he turned off to the eastward, crossing the
Seine upon the Pont Sully, and swinging to the left on the Quai Henri IV
until he reached the Boulevard de la Bastille, and so to the place
forever marked in the annals of time as the spot, not where the Bastille
had stood, but as the spot where it had been _destroyed_.... The great
column uprose blackly before him. At his left was a Metro station, its
entrance surrounded by people, who elbowed and surged, or stood or sat
wearily near to that place of subterranean refuge.... For so had the
_Gothas_ affected the imagination of the poor of Paris! Their nights
were nights of terror, for the Hun in his malignant ingenuity sought to
drop his bombs in this quarter of Paris, near the Bastille, in the
Faubourg St.-Antoine—St.-Antoine, mother of revolutions! If these people
could be terrorized, they might be driven to a fresh revolution,
reasoned Berlin.... They were in terror, but there was no fresh
revolution.... And so they cowered about the subway entrances, men,
women, boys, girls, wailing children in arms, ready to descend into the
cold dampness of the tube at the first note of the _alerte_.

It was the first time Kendall had seen this thing, and it went to his
heart. He felt an uprush of rage against the Hun who wrought thus
inhumanly, thus without that sportsmanship which has lifted war from its
mire of blood and horror and degradation, to paint it with the glamour
of chivalry and heroism.... Chivalry was dead, slain by the _boche_, who
made frightful war upon defenseless populations, stark naked, hideous,
savage war stripped of glamour and of glory. The Hun pictured war not as
a St. Michael clad in shining armor and mounted upon a glorious charger,
but as a skeleton from which the decaying flesh had not completely
fallen, riding upon a wolf....

Kendall walked on, turning now toward home. He felt that he could not
sleep unless he walked himself to exhaustion, so he continued on and on
and on. His consciousness was the ground of a battle between the
inheritances that came from his mother and those which came from his
gentle father—in which his own individual, peculiar reason sought to
intervene.

“Look out,” said his mother. “She’s French, and she must be bad. She’s
getting you into her clutches....”

“Now, now,” said his father, “she’s a sweet little thing, perty as a
picture. I don’t see how there can be harm in her, and if there should
be, it wouldn’t be wilful harm.”

“She’s nice,” said Kendall himself. “She’s a nice girl, and nothing’s
going to happen. Why—I tell you, she’s a _nice_ girl!”

And so it went, suspicion, accusation, argument, defense, until his
brain whirled and he was miserable, but always his intelligence, lighted
by meager experience, emerged triumphant with the declaration that she
was a nice girl, and no harm could come of it....

Kendall forgot that he was a guest in a strange world; that his mode of
thought, his code of ethics, his purview of life and of the affairs of
life were foreign, were not of the currency of this land. It was more
than a mere difference between races; it was a difference between those
elements which make _life_.... But one thing he was given to see, and
that was, that whatever came to Andree and himself could not be evil,
could not be mean or squalid or wicked—and, in his limited vocabulary,
it all came back to the comforting assertion, “But she’s a nice girl.”
That persisted, no matter what other paths of speculation his thoughts
might follow. Andree was good. There was something about her that
proclaimed that she would continue to be _good_, and it was comforting
to him.... And he believed he loved her....

He went to bed and fell asleep with the remembrance of Andree’s kiss
upon his lips....




                               CHAPTER IX


In the morning Kendall was given orders to leave that night for the
headquarters of the Second Division, which lay not distant from
Meaux—that splendid body of old Regulars and Marines who had but a few
weeks before proved the worth of the American soldier to the Hun and to
the Allied armies by its splendidly achieved defense of the Paris-Metz
highway—and there to gather certain information on shoes and ships and
sealing-wax and cabbages and cooties and morale and crops and transport.
He was to acquire this information with all possible despatch and
accuracy, and to return to Paris with his report. An army automobile,
carrying certain other officers, would leave 10 rue Ste.-Anne at nine
o’clock that evening.

So he was going to the front. He was actually to penetrate to those not
distant battle-lines and to hear the sound of guns and himself to come
under hostile fire.... He was not, then, to rest safely in Paris for the
duration of the war; was not to return to America a veteran of the
roll-top desk and the ink-well! It was only for a space of days, but he
would actually have been there, actually have set his feet in a
trench—to be a part of a combat division. He was delighted.... He hoped
something would happen, that his days at the front might not be
uneventful, that he might see and take part in some manifestation of
real war. His sentiments were very boyish. Why, he might actually be
wounded, and so entitled to wear on his sleeve a golden wound chevron!
He found himself close to hoping it would be so, and, with a sudden
assertion of common sense, laughed at himself when he discovered he was
actually selecting the part of his anatomy in which he preferred to
receive his wound. He had decided on a leg, the fleshy part of the leg.
That would not be serious, would not incapacitate him for more than a
few days or weeks. It was really a glowing prospect.... And it would
make him a veteran!

However, going to the front that night was unhandy. He had a
_rendez-vous_ with Andree and an appointment to dine with Monsieur
Robert.... But that would be possible. Number 10 rue Ste.-Anne was just
around the corner from Marty’s. He could dine and then hasten to be
where his orders called him.... Andree was eclipsed by the adventure.

At noon he packed such things as were necessary and whisked them by
taxicab to rue Ste.-Anne where he left them in charge of a sergeant in
the Assistant Provost Marshal’s office. This left him free until nine
o’clock.... He was proud that his equipment contained a steel helmet and
gas-mask.

It was an exultant and excited young man who waited for Andree at the
Metro station in the Place de la Concorde that evening. He wanted to
tell her. He wanted to impress her with the fact that he was a real
soldier and was going into danger. He even rehearsed the nonchalant
speech which would announce it to her.... And at last she appeared—again
in white, again with that quaint air of detachment and concentration,
and still very lovely in her fragile, slender way.... Suddenly he was
sorry he was going, because it meant an absence from her.

Now she was recognizing him in that delightfully timid way of
hers—doubting her welcome until he reassured her.

“Good evening, monsieur,” she said in French. She was always formal in
those first few moments.

“I’ve wanted to see you—wanted to see you ever since you left me last
night,” he said, rather unexpectedly to himself, especially unexpected
in its truth, for it was true, though he realized it only then.

“That is well,” she said, and looked up at him quickly, smilingly, with
something shining in her eyes that had never been there before. “And I
have thought of you.”

“It has been a long day.... All the days are long because you are not
with me.”

“It is true?” She paused, demanding to be assured that he was speaking
in earnest, and he took her arm and pressed it to his side. “That is
nice,” she said. “You should miss me at all times. Oh yes. Ver’, ver’
much.... And I shall also miss you.”

“My dear,” he said, bending close to her ear, “do you love me?”

“Yes,” she said, simply.

And then he knew that his great news had turned to aloes in his mouth.
The thing he had longed to tell her—a little boastfully—he could not
bear to tell her now, and he wondered vaguely why it should be so. But
he must tell her. He started to do so, and stopped. No—it would do as
well after dinner.

“And you?” she said, after a little pause.

“Very much.... Very much....”

“No, no.... I am afraid. It cannot be so. You only say—that is all. You
have make me love you—and soon you will go away and leave me to cry....
Yes....”

“And if I do,” he said, striving to tease her, “you will soon find
another American. Sure you will.... _Vous êtes très-méchante.... Pas
fidèle_.”

“How can you say? It is not kind. Oh, I am _fidèle_. You believe? Yes,
yes. You believe?”

“Of course, child,” he said, repentantly. “I was only joking.”

“And you—are you _fidèle_? On the nights when I do not meet with
you—what then? Do you see some other girl?... Men are not _fidèle_....
You see other girl—lots of other girl.”

“Now look here, you mustn’t say that. You’re the only girl in the world
I give a snap of my finger for.... Just you.”

“It is well,” she said, contentedly; and then, “We dine with thees yo’ng
actor thees evening?”

“Yes.”

“Oh, I am glad.... It is ver’ important. He must like me, and then he
will speak for me at the _Conservatoire_. You must be ver’ good friend
to him so that he will speak for me.”

“No, young lady, you keep away from that young actor. He’s too darned
handsome. I don’t want him stealing you away from me.”

“_Non.... Non...._ I do not care for him, only that he speak for me. You
must not be afraid.”

“Shall we take a taxi?”

“No. There is much time. A taxi is much expensive. I must not make you
spend all your money.”

“That wouldn’t be such a hard job. I haven’t much to spend.”

“It is no matter.... If you had much—that is different—then I would
spend.... It is not for money that I know you—oh no. At first—then I do
not know what kind of yo’ng man you are.... I take you to that expensive
café. It is to punish you because you speak to me as you did.... I did
not know you. But now I know you ver’ well. You have been kind.” She
nodded her head in punctuation. “You have been always nice and ver’
gentle, and so I see you ver’ often.”

“Nobody could help being gentle with you, _mignonne_.”

“I do not know,” she said. “The worl’ it is not nice.” She shook her
head disapprovingly. “All men are not nice.... It is ver’ hard, and
sometimes I am most unhappy. It is so.”

“But you are happy now?”

She pointed her finger down at the sidewalk. “Now—thees minute—yes. In
one hour in four hours it may not be so. Who can say?”

It brought him again to his going away, and a real dread of making the
announcement to her seized upon him. He was afraid she would cry or do
some other equally distressing thing. But that was selfish. He dreaded
her crying because it would be unpleasant for himself and was rather
ashamed of it. He even fancied he could understand something of how she
would actually feel, but he was wrong. He was groping in the darkness,
wandering in the darkness of a strange mansion with many rooms and
devious passages, and it was inevitable that he should miss his way....

They entered Marty’s and Monsieur Robert came forward to greet them with
that delicious, boyish smile of his.

“I am glad you come,” he said, bobbing his head. “My friends they shall
be jealous to see me wit’ such pretty girl.”

Andree was very prim and quiet with that quaint attractive quietness
that always made Kendall wonder, because he had never seen anything like
it. It was a sort of waiting quietness, a kind of recess that Andree
retired into to await events, and from which she would emerge impish or
girlish or serious, like a child or like a weary woman. One felt she was
not present bodily, but was staring at one expectantly to read one’s
mood, or, possibly, to read one into the future and to foretell if good
or ill were to come out of it. Now she watched Monsieur Robert when he
was not looking at her, but the instant his eyes turned toward her her
own eyes would hide behind their lashes diffidently.

“What shall we eat?” Monsieur Robert asked, in French. “_Potage? Poulet
rôti, cresson? Haricots verts? Salade?..._ Eh?”

“Sounds good,” said Kendall, but monsieur was looking expectantly to
Andree.

“That is well,” she said.

“Pommard?... The _vin ordinaire_ is not for us to-night?”

She was not interested in the wine, and Kendall trusted to the young
actor’s judgment. So they gave their order, and were only commencing on
the soup when a commotion at the door apprised Kendall that Jacques was
coming. Andree had started at the noise.

“It is Jacques,” he said to her. “I told you about him.”

“Yes,” she said, but did not turn her head.

In a moment Jacques paused at the table and stared, drew himself to his
full height, threw back his hair from his brow with a flamboyant
gesture, and shouted: “A-ah!... A-ah!...”

Kendall was embarrassed. There was no telling what Jacques might say or
do, for the man had a rather terrible, if delicious, frankness, and
discussed with openness and noise what Kendall was accustomed to hear
spoken of in whispers by men alone—and by them in corners.... He had
heard Jacques one evening going from table to table—demanding of friends
and strangers alike their judgment on a certain phase of the art of
making love. Kendall had really been shocked and had looked for somebody
to stand up and smite Jacques mightily, but everybody had laughed and
answered according to their kind with a frankness equal to Jacques’s....
So now Kendall was apprehensive.

“A-ah!...” said Jacques again, and pointed at Andree. “I ask you if I
should not find for you a girl, and you say _no_. Now I know why....
A-ah!...” He frowned at Andree and waggled his head. “She is nice,” he
said, approvingly. Then he appeared to notice Monsieur Robert for the
first time and glared at him, glared and poked a long finger under his
nose. “_He_ dines with you,” he said, tragically. “You—you make
introduce your girl to him.... _Oh, là là!_ What is this? Do you not
know that this man steals little girls?... He is ver’ bad. Look you out
or he will steal her from you. It is I, Jacques, your friend, who make
the warning.” Then suddenly he turned away and flew across the room to
kiss a young woman who had just entered with the elderly critic.

Ken was at a loss to know if the fellow had been in earnest or were
merely up to his usual capers....

The three at the table chatted, Andree always maintaining that queer
reserve, not emerging from her hiding-place, speaking only when directly
addressed, and then briefly. Monsieur Robert looked at her frequently,
and ever more frequently, for she was a charming picture, and more than
once spoke to her in French. She always replied in English.

“I think mademoiselle look ver’ nice on the stage,” he said to Ken. “If
only she have the talent.” He shrugged his shoulders. “Pretty eyes and
talent for act not always are together,” he said.

“You can’t tell till you try,” said Kendall, colloquially.

“I should like for hear mademoiselle recite one day. Mademoiselle
studies Racine?”

“Already I know many parts,” said Andree.

“That is well. Some day you and Capitaine Ware shall come and you shall
recite for me, _n’est-ce pas_?”

“_Oui, monsieur_,” she said, primly.

“There is but one way to enter into the stage,” he continued. “It is the
_Conservatoire_. Then, if one make the success, there is the Comédie
Française.... But it is not easy to enter into the _Conservatoire_.”

“_Mais non_.... It is ver’ difficult,” she said, despairingly.

“Ah.... But if some one speak for you? Then it ees not the same—it ees
differen’.... But we shall see. Capitaine Ware ees my frien’. I would
oblige him. Also I would oblige mademoiselle.” He looked at her rather
intently. “We shall see.”

The roast chicken arrived, surrounded by cress and swimming in a
delicious sauce. Conversation languished. From time to time Kendall
turned to look at Andree, for it always delighted him to see her eat,
she was so intent about it. She went about it as if eating were an
intricate problem requiring concentration.... And presently they fell to
chatting in fragmentary fashion, Andree translating for both Kendall and
Monsieur Robert, and it was very jolly and pleasant.... Kendall did not
notice how often the young actor glanced at Andree....

Presently they were through and monsieur was compelled to hurry away
because he had a part in the piece that was playing that evening. “I
mus’ see you ver’ soon,” he said to them both, but with his eyes
intently upon Andree’s—which dropped before his gaze. “I mus’ hear
mademoiselle recite.”

“We’ll fix it up,” said Ken. “Good night.” They shook hands and Monsieur
Robert bent to kiss Andree’s hand, bent gracefully, with a charming air
that was half joking, half serious. It set upon him well. “Good night,”
he said, and hastened toward the theater.

“I like him,” said Kendall.

Andree looked at him quickly, her face expressionless. “Yes?” she said.

“Don’t you?”

“How can I say? I do not know him.... He is ver’ handsome.”

“It doesn’t matter whether you like him or not—so long as he gets you
into that _Conservatoire_ thing.”

She did not reply.

They walked the best part of a block before she spoke. “It is ver’
_nécessaire_ for me to enter into the Conservatoire.... Oh, ver’
_nécessaire_.... I mus’ earn money. I have no money. I mus’ earn it for
myself, because there is no one to earn it for me.... You do not
onderstan’.... Sometime, before the war, yo’ng girls say they do not
need to earn money, because they marry. All will be wives and the
husbands they will earn.... Now it ees not so—_non_—it ees differen’....
You onderstan’? Many, many yo’ng girl mus’ learn to earn money, and
because they will always be alone.... There can be no one....”

“It does mean a lot to you, doesn’t it? I’ll be mighty happy if I can
help.”

She was silent again for a time and then said, suddenly, as if thinking
aloud, “I theenk I can enter into the _Conservatoire_ if I want to....”

“Eh?”

“It was not anything.”

He scarcely heard her; his mind was not on what she said, for he was
thinking to himself, “I must tell her.... I must tell her now,” and was
nerving himself up to make the announcement of his departure.

“Andree,” he said, and stopped.

“Yes?”

“Do you love me?” he said, procrastinating. It was not what he had
intended to say.

“Yes.” She spoke very sweetly. “And you?” The question sounded so
charming from her lips, the tone and the manner of it were rare and
lovely; they seemed to say, “I know you love me, but it is sweet—very
sweet—to hear you say so.” The street was dark and he drew her close to
him, and so they walked, his arm about her waist, she responding to his
touch so deliciously.

“I love you—I do love you,” he said.

“It is well.... I am ver’ happy.”

“But, Andree—”

“Yes?”

“I—I’ve got to go away.... Only for a day or two,” he hastened to say.
“It’s just a little trip.”

“When?”

“Now—to-night.”

“_To-night?_” Her tone was so strange, so startled, so shocked.
“_To-night?_”

“Orders,” he said. “Nothing could take me away from you but orders.”

She had drawn away from him, and was striving to peer into his face, but
the darkness prevented. She was striving to read from his eyes if he
were telling the truth. She had feared his going—this young man from
strange America. The possibility of his going had become a nightmare to
her—always present in the profound recesses of her thoughts.

“Where?” she asked.

“To the front.”

“O-oh!...” It was not an exclamation, it was a suppressed cry. It was
one of the things she had feared, that this young soldier would be sent
from her to the hell of battle, and that he would not return, as the
brothers and the husbands and the sweethearts of her acquaintances had
gone—to be swallowed up and to be seen no more on earth.... He was
going.... The thing was going to happen to her.... Her man—the man she
loved—was going to become a sacrifice as those millions of other men had
become sacrifices.

He had feared that she would cry, that she would cling to him with sobs
and beg him not to go, that she might make some sort of regrettable
scene, but she did not. But she was very still with the stillness of the
stricken.

“_C’est la guerre_,” she said in a whisper.

It is the war—that phrase so often heard, which excuses everything,
accounts for everything. But now it had a deeper meaning. _This_ was the
war! This parting was the war—this giving of a loved one to death, and
this remaining behind in an agony of fear and of loneliness—this was
indeed the war!... To men war is one thing—it is a grim fight, it is
suffering and wounds, it is bravery and glory.... To man war, at its
most, can mean only death. But to a woman who sends her man it means
more, infinitely, terribly more. It means that she may be deprived of
all that makes life desirable. It means that she must remain behind to
fear and to suffer, and then, when the feared news arrives, to face a
life that is not life, a life without love, without companionship.... A
life with the smile snatched away and with the heart robbed of laughter!
It means that from her the one, the great, the vital thing is to be
forever missing, and that the future is to be nothing but day following
day.... War means that men must die.... War means that women must
continue to live!

“You mustn’t worry.... I—I sha’n’t be in the fighting. I’m just going to
get certain information.” He had looked forward to boasting to her about
how he would stand under fire. He would have done it in such a way that
it would not have sounded like boasting, but in a mock-modest way. He
had wanted to show her that he was actually going into it to take his
chance with the rest.... Now he had no thought but to reassure her; he
had no desire to take unto himself the heroic. “I promise you to come
back,” he said. “I sha’n’t be hurt.... It is only a day or two, and you
mustn’t be afraid.... Why”—here he lied—“I may not even be near to
danger.”

She shook her head. “I know,” she said. And then: “I shall not let you
be hurt.... I shall prevent it.” Like a little Spartan, she was herself
again, speaking like her own self, almost gaily. “Do you theenk I should
let you be hurt?... Oh no! Not in the least.” She was being brave and
calm—for him!

“I will be back surely in four days—the fourth day from to-day.... Then
I shall see you. We will make the engagement now.”

“Yes.”

“Where?”

“I shall dine with Arlette,” she said, with a little laugh. “I will come
there—it is easier—_sept heures_.”

“And—”

“Yes,” she said, quietly.

“I—by gad!—I _do_ love you.”

She touched his cheek gently with her finger. “And there will be many
_petites minutes_,” she said. “We shall have much happiness.”

“I hope so.”

“And you will be _fidèle_—when you go away from me? You will not find a
yo’ng girl at the front—in the trenches? Promise me?” She was laughing
gaily now.

“If I find a girl in the trenches,” he said, “I will give her to the
_boche_.”

“It is well,” she said, and clapped her hands merrily.

They were close to the Metro station at the Palais Royal now, and, for
their parting, paused in the blackness of a recess.

“I can’t go home with you—do you mind?”

“Ver’ much.”

“Good-by, _mignonne_....”

For a moment she clung to him, the fear that was upon her manifest in
the trembling of her little body. “Not good-by,” she said. “We must not
say good-by.”

“Four days from to-day—without fail.”

“I shall not fail—I shall come, _certainement_.”

Again their lips met. “Now you must go,” he said, and she turned away
slowly and walked in that dainty way of hers toward the entrance to the
Metro. He stood watching her, expecting her to turn back, but she did
not turn back.... In a moment she disappeared down the stairs. He was
miserable....

But he did not understand—or if he did understand he hid the truth from
himself—what this parting on this evening was to Andree.... Last night
she had confessed that she loved him, and had made him a promise, a
promise that he half understood, but which he pretended to himself he
did not understand at all.... Perhaps he did not really grasp the extent
of her surrender, for young men, American young men of such upbringing
as his, and such code of ethics as he knew, are not equipped to
understand—and sometimes nature has made them very dull.... He had
drifted along with Andree until he was beyond his depth. To drift had
been so easy, for his heart had told him Andree was good
